1. INTRODUCTION
We provide in this paper a deﬁnition of risks (market risks as well as nonmarket risks) and
present and justify a uniﬁed framework for the analysis, construction, and implementation
of measures of risk. We do not assume completeness of markets. These measures of risk can
be used as (extra) capital requirements to regulate the risk assumed by market participants,
traders, and insurance underwriters, as well as to allocate existing capital.
Initial manuscript received February 1996; ﬁnal revision received September 1998.
Address correspondence to P. Artzner, Institut de Recherche Math´ematique Avanc´ee, Universit´e Louis Pasteur,
7 rue Rene Descartes, F-67084 Strasbourg, France; e-mail: artzner@math.u-strasbg.fr.
The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Soci´et´e G´en´erale for this work. The views expressed are
those of the authors. For useful discussions on a related paper, we thank participants of the following meetings:
Boston University Mathematical Finance Day, March 31, 1996, University of Waterloo Insurance and Finance
Conference, May 24, 1996, StudienZentrum Gerzensee Symposium in Financial Markets, July 15–26, 1996,
Latsis Symposium, ETH Z¨urich, September 24–25, 1996, Universit¨at Karlsruhe Geld, Finanzwirtschaft, Banken,
Versicherungen Tagung, December 11–13, 1996, Aarhus University Workshop, February 25–March 1, 1997. We
also thank D. Madan, discussant at the French Finance Association International Meeting, Geneva, June 1996,
F. Diebold, discussant at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 1997 Financial Markets Conference, R. Bliss,
P. Boyle, V. Brousseau, P. Embrechts, A. Hoffman, W. Neuefeind, C. Petitmengin, P. Poncet, J. Renegar, and
E. Shiu, as well as a referee of an earlier version of this paper.
c⃝1999 Blackwell Publishers, 350 Main St., Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 108 Cowley Road, Oxford,
OX4 1JF, UK.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
For these purposes, the paper is organized as follows:
(1)
We deﬁne “acceptable” future random net worths in Section 2.1 and provide a set
of axioms about the set of acceptable future net worths in Section 2.2.
(2)
We deﬁne the measure of risk of an unacceptable position, once a reference, “prudent,” investment instrument has been speciﬁed, as the minimum extra capital
(Section 2.3), which, invested in the reference instrument, makes the future value
of the modiﬁed position become acceptable.
(3)
We state axioms on measures of risk and relate them to the axioms on acceptance
sets. We argue that these axioms should hold for any risk measure that is to be
used to effectively regulate or manage risks. We call risk measures that satisfy the
four axioms coherent.
(4)
In Section 3, we present a (simpliﬁed) description of three existing methods for
measuring market risk: the “variance-quantile” method of value-at-risk (VaR),
the margin system SPAN (Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk) developed by the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and the margin rules of the Securities and Exchanges Commission (SEC), which are used by the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD).
(5)
We analyze existing methods in terms of the axioms and show that the last two
methods are essentially the same (i.e., that when slightly modiﬁed they are mathematical duals of each other).
(6)
In Section 3.2 we make a speciﬁc recommendation for the improvement of the
NASD-SEC margin system.
(7)
We examine in particular the consequences of using value at risk for risk management (Section 3.3).
(8)
We provide in Section 4.1 a general representation for all coherent risk measures
in terms of “generalized scenarios” by applying a consequence of the separation
theorem for convex sets already in the mathematics literature.
(9)
We give conditions for extending into a coherent risk measure a measurement
already agreed upon for a restricted class of risks (Section 4.2).
(10)
We use the representation results to suggest a speciﬁc coherent measure (Section 5.1) called tail conditional expectation, as well as to give an example of
construction of a coherent measure out of measures on separate classes of risks,
for example credit risk and market risk (Section 5.2).
(11)
Our axioms are not restrictive enough to specify a unique risk measure. Instead,
they characterize a large class of risk measures. The choice of precisely which
measure to use (from this class) should presumably be made on the basis of additional economic considerations.
Tail conditional expectation is, under some
assumptions, the least expensive among those that are coherent and accepted by
regulators, being more conservative than the value at risk measurement.
A nontechnical presentation of part of this work is given in Artzner et al. (1997).
2. DEFINITION OF RISK AND OF COHERENT RISK MEASURES
This section accomplishes the program set in items (1), (2), and (3) above, in the presence
of different regulations and different currencies.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
2.1. Risk as the Random Variable: Future Net Worth
Although several papers (including an earlier version of this one) deﬁne risk in terms of
changes in values between two dates, we argue that because risk is related to the variability
of the future value of a position, due to market changes or more generally to uncertain
events, it is better to consider future values only. Notice that there is no need for the initial
costs of the components of the position to be determined from universally deﬁned market
prices (think of over-the-counter transactions). The principle of “bygones are bygones”
leads to this “future wealth” approach.
The basic objects of our study shall therefore be the random variables on the set of states
of nature at a future date, interpreted as possible future values of positions or portfolios
currently held. A ﬁrst crude, but crucial, measurement of the risk of a position will be
whether its future value belongs or does not belong to the subset of acceptable risks, as
decided by a supervisor such as:
(a)
a regulator who takes into account the unfavorable states when allowing a risky
position that may draw on the resources of the government—for example as a
guarantor of last resort;
(b)
an exchange’s clearing ﬁrm, which has to make good on the promises to all parties
of transactions being securely completed;
(c)
an investment manager who knows that his ﬁrm has basically given to its traders
an exit option in which the strike “price” consists in being ﬁred in the event of big
trading losses on one’s position.
In each of these cases, there is a trade-off between the severity of the risk measurement and
the level of activities in the supervised domain. The axioms and characterizations we shall
provide do not single out a speciﬁc risk measure, and additional economic considerations
have to play a role in the ﬁnal choice of a measure.
For an unacceptable risk (i.e., a position with an unacceptable future net worth), one
remedy may be to alter the position.
Another remedy is to look for some commonly
accepted instruments that, when added to the current position, make its future value
acceptable to the regulator/supervisor.
The current cost of getting enough of this or
these instrument(s) is a good candidate for a measure of risk of the initially unacceptable
position.
For simplicity, we consider only one period of uncertainty (0, T ) between two dates 0
and T . The various currencies are numbered by i, 1 ≤i ≤I, and for each of them one
“reference” instrument is given, which carries one unit of date 0 currency i into ri units of
date T currency i . Default-free zero coupon bonds with maturity at date T may be chosen
as particularly simple reference instruments in their own currency. Other possible reference
instruments are mentioned in Section 2.3, before the statement of Axiom T.
The period (0, T ) can be the period between hedging and rehedging, a ﬁxed interval (e.g.,
two weeks), the period required to liquidate a position, or the length of coverage provided
by an insurance contract.
We take the point of view of an investor subject to regulations and/or supervision in
country 1. He considers a portfolio of securities in various currencies.
Date 0 exchange rates are supposed to be one, and ei denotes the random number of units
of currency 1 which one unit of currency i buys at date T .
An investor’s initial portfolio consists of positions Ai, 1 ≤i ≤I, (possibly within some
institutional constraints such as the absence of short sales and a “congruence” for each

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
currency between assets and liabilities). The position Ai provides Ai(T ) units of currency
i at date T. We call risk the investor’s future net worth P
1≤i≤I ei · Ai(T ).
REMARK 2.1.
The assumption of the position being held during the whole period can be
relaxed substantially. In particular, positions may vary due to the agent’s actions or those of
counterparties. In general, we can consider the risk of following a strategy (which speciﬁes
the portfolio held at each date as a function of the market events and counterparties’ actions)
over an arbitrary period of time. Our current results in the simpliﬁed setting represent a
ﬁrst step.
2.2. Axioms on Acceptance Sets (Sets of Acceptable Future Net Worths)
We suppose that the set of all possible states of the world at the end of the period is
known, but the probabilities of the various states occurring may be unknown or not subject
to common agreement. When we deal with market risk, the state of the world might be
described by a list of the prices of all securities and all exchange rates, and we assume that
the set of all possible such lists is known. Of course, this assumes that markets at date T are
liquid; if they are not, more complicated models are required in which we can distinguish
the risks of a position and of a future net worth because, with illiquid markets, the mapping
from the former to the latter may not be linear.
NOTATION.
(a)
We shall call Ä the set of states of nature, and assume it is ﬁnite. Considering Ä as
the set of outcomes of an experiment, we compute the ﬁnal net worth of a position
for each element of Ä. It is a random variable denoted by X. Its negative part,
max(−X, 0), is denoted by X−and the supremum of X−is denoted by ∥X−∥. The
random variable identically equal to 1 is denoted by 1. The indicator function of
state ω is denoted by 1{ω}.
(b)
Let G be the set of all risks, that is the set of all real-valued functions on Ä. Since
Ä is assumed to be ﬁnite, G can be identiﬁed with Rn, where n = card(Ä). The
cone of nonnegative elements in G shall be denoted by L+, its negative by L−.
(c)
We call Ai, j, j ∈Ji, a set of ﬁnal net worths, expressed in currency i, which, in
country i, are accepted by regulator/supervisor j.
(d)
We shall denote Ai the intersection T
j∈Ji Ai, j and use the generic notation A in
the listing of axioms below.
We shall now state axioms for acceptance sets. Some have an immediate interpretation;
the interpretation of the third one will be easier in terms of risk measure (see Axiom S in
Section 2.3). The rationale for Axioms 2.1 and 2.2 is that a ﬁnal net worth that is always
nonnegative does not require extra capital, but a net worth that is always (strictly) negative
certainly does.
AXIOM 2.1.
The acceptance set A contains L+.
AXIOM 2.2.
The acceptance set A does not intersect the set L−−where
L−−= {X | for each ω ∈Ä, X(ω) < 0}.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
It will also be interesting to consider a stronger axiom.
AXIOM 2.2′.
The acceptance set A satisﬁes A ∩L−= {0}.
The next axiom reﬂects risk aversion on the part of the regulator, exchange director, or
trading room supervisor.
AXIOM 2.3.
The acceptance set A is convex.
A less natural requirement on the set of acceptable ﬁnal net worths is stated in the next
axiom.
AXIOM 2.4.
The acceptance set A is a positively homogeneous cone.
2.3. Correspondence between Acceptance Sets and Measures of Risk
Sets of acceptable future net worths are the primitive objects to be considered in order
to describe acceptance or rejection of a risk. We present here how, given some “reference
instrument,” there is a natural way to deﬁne a measure of risk by describing how close or
how far from acceptance a position is.
DEFINITION 2.1.
A measure of risk is a mapping from G into R.
In Section 3 we shall speak of a model-dependent measure of risk when an explicit
probability on Ä is used to construct it (see, e.g., Sections 3.1 and 3.3), and of a model-free
measure otherwise (see, e.g., Section 3.2). Model-free measures can still be used in the
case where only risks of positions are considered.
When positive, the number ρ(X) assigned by the measure ρ to the risk X will be interpreted (see Deﬁnition 2.2 below) as the minimum extra cash the agent has to add to the
risky position X, and invest “prudently,” that is in the reference instrument, to be allowed to
proceed with his plans. If it is negative, the cash amount −ρ(X) can be withdrawn from the
position or it can be received as restitution, as in the case of organized markets for ﬁnancial
futures.
REMARK 2.2.
The reader may be surprised that we deﬁne a measure of risk on the whole
of G. Why, in particular, should we consider a risk, a ﬁnal net worth, like the constant −1?
No one would or could willingly enter into a deal that with certainty entails a negative of
ﬁnal net worth equal to 1! Let us provide three answers:
i.
We want to extend the accounting procedures dealing with future certain bad
events, such as loss in inventories or degradation (wear and tear) of the physical
plant, into measurement procedures for future uncertain bad events.
ii.
Actual measurements used in practice seem to be indeed deﬁned only for risks
in which both states with positive and states with negative ﬁnal net worths exist. Section 4.2 shows that, under well-deﬁned conditions, they can be extended
without ambiguity to measurements for all functions in G.
iii.
Multiperiodmodelsmaynaturallyintroduceatsomeintermediatedatetheprospect
of such ﬁnal net worths.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
REMARK 2.3.
It has been pointed out to us that describing risk by a single number
involves a great loss of information. However, the actual decison about taking a risk or
allowing one to take it is fundamentally binary, of the “yes or no” type, and we claimed at
the beginning of Section 2.1 that this is the actual origin of risk measurement.
REMARK 2.4.
The expression “cash” deserves some discussion in the case of a publicly
traded company. It refers to an increase in equity. The amount ρ(X) may, for example, be
used to lower the amount of debt in the balance sheet of the company.
We deﬁne a correspondence between acceptance sets and measures of risk.
DEFINITION 2.2. Risk measure associated with an acceptance set.
Given the total rate
of return r on a reference instrument, the risk measure associated with the acceptance set
A is the mapping from G to R denoted by ρA,r and deﬁned by
ρA,r(X) = inf{m | m · r + X ∈A}.
REMARK 2.5.
Acceptance sets allow us to address a question of importance to an international regulator and to the risk manager of a multinational ﬁrm, namely the invariance of
acceptability of a position with respect to a change of currencies. If, indeed, we have for
each currency i, 1 ≤i ≤I, ei · Ai = A1, then, for each position providing an acceptable
future net worth X in currency i, the same position provides a future net worth ei/ej · X
in currency j, which is also acceptable. The situation is more complex for unacceptable
positions. If a position requires an extra initial cash of ρAi,ri(X) units to be invested in the
ith reference instrument, it is not necessarily true that this amount is equal to the number
ρAj,rj(X) of initial units deemed sufﬁcient by the regulation(s) in country j, if invested in
the jth reference instrument, even though we supposed the initial exchange rate to be 1.
DEFINITION 2.3. Acceptance set associated with a risk measure.
The acceptance set
associated with a risk measure ρ is the set denoted by Aρ and deﬁned by
Aρ = {X ∈G | ρ(X) ≤0}.
We consider now several possible properties for a risk measure ρ deﬁned on G. In
Section 2.4 they will be related to the axioms stated above concerning acceptance sets. For
clarity we label the new axioms with letters.
The ﬁrst requirement ensures that the risk measure is stated in the same units as the ﬁnal
net worth, except for the use of the reference instrument. This particular asset is modeled
as having the initial price 1 and a strictly positive price r (or total return) in any state of
nature at date T. It is the regulator’s (supervisor’s) responsibility to accept for r possible
random values as well as values smaller than 1.
Axiom T means that adding (respectively, subtracting) the sure initial amount α to the
initial position and investing it in the reference instrument simply decreases (increases) the
risk measure by α.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
AXIOM T. Translation invariance.
For all X ∈G and all real numbers α, we have
ρ(X + α · r) = ρ(X) −α.
REMARK 2.6.
Axiom T ensures that, for each X, ρ(X +ρ(X)·r) = 0. This equality has
a natural interpretation in terms of the acceptance set associated with ρ (see Deﬁnition 2.3
above).
REMARK 2.7.
By insisting on references to cash and to time, Axiom T clearly indicates
that our approach goes much further than the interpretation given by Wang of an earlier
version of this paper: Wang (1996, p. 3) indeed claims that “the main function of a risk
measure is to properly rank risks.”
AXIOM S. Subadditivity.
For all X1 and X2 ∈G, ρ(X1 + X2) ≤ρ(X1) + ρ(X2).
We contend that this property, which could be stated in the brisk form “a merger does
not create extra risk,” is a natural requirement:
(a)
If an exchange’s risk measure were to fail to satisfy this property, then, for example,
an individual wishing to take the risk X1 + X2 may open two accounts, one for the
risk X1 and the other for the risk X2, incurring the smaller margin requirement of
ρ(X1) + ρ(X2), a matter of concern for the exchange.
(b)
If a ﬁrm were forced to meet a requirement of extra capital which did not satisfy this
property, the ﬁrm might be motivated to break up into two separately incorporated
afﬁliates, a matter of concern for the regulator.
(c)
Bankruptcy risk inclines society to require less capital from a group without “ﬁrewalls” between various business units than it does require when one “unit” is
protected from liability attached to failure of another “unit.”
(d)
Suppose that two desks in a ﬁrm compute in a decentralized way the measures
ρ(X1) and ρ(X2) of the risks they have taken. If the function ρ is subadditive,
the supervisor of the two desks can count on the fact that ρ(X1) + ρ(X2) is a
feasible guarantee relative to the global risk X1 + X2. If indeed he has an amount
m of cash available for their joint business, he knows that imposing limits m1 and
m2 with m = m1 + m2, allows him to decentralize his cash constraint into two
cash constraints, one per desk. Similarly, the ﬁrm can allocate its capital among
managers.
AXIOM PH. Positive homogeneity.
For all λ ≥0 and all X ∈G, ρ(λX) = λρ(X).
REMARK 2.8.
If position size directly inﬂuences risk (e.g., if positions are large enough
that the time required to liquidate them depends on their sizes) then we should consider
the consequences of lack of liquidity when computing the future net worth of a position.
With this in mind, Axioms S and PH, about mappings from random variables into the reals,
remain reasonable.
REMARK 2.9.
Axiom S implies that ρ(nX) ≤nρ(X) for n = 1, 2, . . .. In Axiom PH we
have imposed the reverse inequality (and require equality for all positive λ) to model what a
government or an exchange might impose in a situation where no netting or diversiﬁcation

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
occurs, in particular because the government does not prevent many ﬁrms from all taking
the same position.
REMARK 2.10.
Axioms T and PH imply that, for each α, ρ(α · (−r)) = α.
AXIOM M. Monotonicity.
For all X and Y ∈G with X ≤Y, we have ρ(Y) ≤ρ(X).
REMARK 2.11.
Axiom M rules out the risk measure deﬁned by ρ(X) = −EP[X] +
α · σP(X), where α > 0 and where σP denotes the standard deviation operator, computed
under the probability P. Axiom S rules out the “semivariance” type of risk measure deﬁned
by ρ(X) = −EP [X] + σP((X −EP [X])−).
AXIOM R. Relevance.
For all X ∈G with X ≤0 and X ̸= 0, we have ρ(X) > 0.
REMARK 2.12.
This axiom is clearly necessary, but not sufﬁcient, to prevent concentration of risks to remain undetected (see Section 4.3).
We notice that for λ > 0, Axioms S, PH, M, and R remain satisﬁed by the measure λ · ρ
if satisﬁed by the measure ρ. It is not the case for Axiom T.
The following choice of required properties will deﬁne coherent risk measures.
DEFINITION 2.4. Coherence.
A risk measure satisfying the four axioms of translation
invariance, subadditivity, positive homogeneity, and monotonicity is called coherent.
2.4. Correspondence between the Axioms on Acceptance Sets and the Axioms on
Measures of Risks
The reader has certainly noticed that we claimed the acceptance set to be the fundamental
object and that we discussed the axioms mostly in terms of the associated risk measure.
The following propositions show that this was reasonable.
PROPOSITION 2.1.
If the set B satisﬁes Axioms 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4, the risk measure
ρB,r is coherent. Moreover AρB,r = ¯B, the closure of B.
Proof of Proposition 2.1.
(1)
Axioms 2.2 and 2.3 ensure that for each X, ρB,r(X) is a ﬁnite number.
(2)
The equality inf{p | X + (α + p) · r ∈B} = inf{q | X + q · r ∈B} −α proves
that ρB,r(X + r · α) = ρ(X) −α, and Axiom T is satisﬁed.
(3)
The subadditivity of ρB follows from the fact that if X + m · r and Y + n · r both
belong to B, so does X + Y + (m + n) · r as Axioms 2.3 and 2.4 show.
(4)
If m > ρB,r(X) then for each λ > 0 we have λ· X +λ·m ·r ∈B, by Deﬁnition 2.3
and Axiom 2.4, and this proves that ρB,r(λ · X) ≤λ · m. If m < ρB,r(X), then for
each λ > 0 we have λ · X + λ · m · r /∈B, and this proves that ρB,r(λ · X) ≥λ · m.
We conclude that ρB,r(λ · X) = λ · ρB,r(X).
(5)
Monotonicity of ρB,r follows from the fact that if X ≤Y and X + m · r ∈B then
Y + m · r ∈B by use of Axioms 2.3 and 2.1 and Deﬁnition 2.3.
(6)
For each X ∈B, ρB,r(X) ≤0, hence X ∈AρB,r . Proposition 2.2 and points (1)
through (5) above ensure that AρB,r is closed, which proves that AρB,r = ¯B.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
PROPOSITION 2.2.
If a risk measure ρ is coherent, then the acceptance set Aρ is closed
and satisﬁes Axioms 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4. Moreover, ρ = ρAρ,r.
Proof of Proposition 2.2.
(1)
Subadditivity and positive homogeneity ensure that ρ is a convex function on G,
hence continuous, and that the set Aρ = {X | ρ(X) ≤0} is a closed, convex, and
homogeneous cone.
(2)
Positive homogeneity implies that ρ(0) = 0. Together with monotonicity this
ensures that the set Aρ contains the positive orthant L+.
(3)
Let X be in L−−with ρ(X) < 0. Axiom M ensures that ρ(0) < 0, a contradiction.
If ρ(X) = 0, then we ﬁnd α > 0 such that X + α · r ∈L−−, which provides, by
use of Axiom T, the relation −α ≥0, a contradiction. Hence ρ(X) > 0; that is,
X /∈Aρ, which establishes Axiom 2.2.
(4)
For each X, let δ be any number with ρAρ,r(X) < δ. Then X + δ · r ∈Aρ, hence
ρ(X + δ · r) ≤0, hence ρ(X) ≤δ, which proves that ρ(X) ≤ρAρ,r(X); that is,
ρ ≤ρAρ,r.
(5)
For each X, let δ be any number with δ > ρ(X), then ρ(X + δ · r) < 0 and
X + δ · r ∈Aρ, hence ρAρ,r(X + δ · r) ≤0. This proves that ρAρ,r(X) ≤δ and
that ρAρ,r(X) ≤ρ(X), hence ρAρ,r ≤ρ.
PROPOSITION 2.3.
If a set B satisﬁes Axioms 2.1, 2.2′, 2.3, and 2.4, then the coherent
risk measure ρB,r satisﬁes the relevance axiom. If a coherent risk measure ρ satisﬁes the
relevance axiom, then the acceptance set AρB,r satisﬁes Axiom 2.2′.
Proof of Proposition 2.3.
(1)
For an X like that in the statement of Axiom R we know that X ∈L−and X ̸= 0,
hence, by Axiom 2.2′, X /∈B, which means that ρB,r(X) > 0.
(2)
For X ∈L−and X ̸= 0, Axiom R provides ρ(X) > 0 and X /∈B.
3. THREE CURRENTLY USED METHODS OF MEASURING MARKET RISK
In this section, we give a (simpliﬁed) description of three currently used methods of measuring market risk:
1.
SPAN (SPAN 1995) developed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange,
2.
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules used by the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD 1996; Federal Reserve 1994), similar to rules
used by the Paciﬁc Exchange and the Chicago Board of Options Exchange
3.
the quantile-based Value at Risk (or VaR) method (Basle Committee 1996; Dowd
1998; Dufﬁe and Pan 1997; Derivatives Policy Group 1995; Risk Magazine 1996;
RiskMetrics 1995).
We examine the relationship of these three methods with the abstract approach provided
in Section 2. We also suggest slightly more general forms for some of the methods. It
will be shown that the distinction made above between model-free and model-dependent
measures of risk actually shows up.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
3.1. An Organized Exchange’s Rules: The SPAN Computations
To illustrate the SPAN margin system (SPAN 1995; see also MATIF 1993, pp. 7–8), we
consider how the initial margin is calculated for a simple portfolio consisting of units of a
futures contract and of several puts and calls with a common expiration date on this futures
contract. The SPAN margin for such a portfolio is computed as follows: First, fourteen
“scenarios” are considered. Each scenario is speciﬁed by an up or down move of volatility
combined with no move, or an up move, or a down move of the futures price by 1/3, 2/3,
or 3/3 of a speciﬁed “range.” Next, two additional scenarios relate to “extreme” up or
down moves of the futures price. The measure of risk is the maximum loss incurred, using
the full loss for the ﬁrst fourteen scenarios and only 35 percent of the loss for the last two
“extreme” scenarios. A speciﬁed model, typically the Black model, is used to generate the
corresponding prices for the options under each scenario.
The calculation can be viewed as producing the maximum of the expected loss under each
of sixteen probability measures. For the ﬁrst fourteen scenarios the probability measures
are point masses at each of the fourteen points in the space Ä of securities prices. The cases
of extreme moves correspond to taking the convex combination (0.35, 0.65) of the losses at
the “extreme move” point under study and at the “no move at all” point (i.e., prices remain
the same). We shall call these probability measures “generalized scenarios.”
The account of the investor holding a portfolio is required to have sufﬁcient current net
worth to support the maximum expected loss. If it does not, then extra cash in an amount
equal to the “measure of risk” involved is required as margin call. This is completely in
line with our interpretation of Deﬁnition 2.3.
The following deﬁnition generalizes the SPAN computation and presents it in our framework.
DEFINITION 3.1.
The risk measure, deﬁned by a nonempty set P of probability measures
or “generalized scenarios” on the space Ä and the total return r on a reference instrument,
is the function ρP on G deﬁned by
ρP(X) = sup{EP[−X/r] | P ∈P}.
The scenario-based measures from Deﬁnition 3.1 are coherent risk measures.
PROPOSITION 3.1.
Given the total return r on a reference instrument and the nonempty
set P of probability measures, or “generalized scenarios,” on the set Ä of states of the
world, the risk measure ρP of Deﬁnition 3.1 is a coherent risk measure. It satisﬁes the
relevance axiom if and only if the union of the supports of the probabilities P ∈P is equal
to the set Ä.
Proof of Proposition 3.1.
Axioms PH and M ensure that a coherent risk measure satisﬁes
Axiom R if and only if the negative of each indicator function 1{ω} has a (strictly) positive
risk measure. This is equivalent to the fact that any state belongs to at least one of the
supports of the probabilities found in the set P.
Section 4.1 shows that each coherent risk measure is obtained by way of scenarios.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
3.2. Some Model-Free Measures of Risks: The SEC Rules on Final Net Worth
The second example of a risk measure used in practice is found in the rules of the SEC
and the NASD. Their common approach is to consider portfolios as formal lists of securities
and impose “margin” requirements on them, in contrast to the SPAN approach which takes
the random variables—(gains and losses of the portfolios of securities)—as basic objects
to measure. In the terminology of the Basle Committee Amendment (Basle 1996) we have
here something similar to a “standardized measurement method.”
Certain spread positions such as a long call and a short call of higher exercise price on the
same underlying stock, both calls having same maturity date, are described in NASD (1996,
p. 8133) and SEC rule 15c3-1a,(11) as requiring no margin (no “deduction”). No justiﬁcation is given for this speciﬁcation. We shall use the paper by Rudd and Schroeder (1982)
as the basis for explaining, for a simple example, the computation of margin according to
these common rules.
Let A be a portfolio consisting of two long calls with strike 10, two short calls with strike
20, three short calls with strike 30, four long calls with strike 40, and one short call with
strike 50. For simplicity assume all calls to be European and exercise dates to be equal to
the end of the holding period. A simple graph shows that the ﬁnal value of this position is
never below −10, which should entail a margin deposit of at most 10.
Under the SEC method, the position A is represented or “decomposed” as a portfolio of
long call spreads. No margin is required for a spread if the strike of the long side is less than
the strike of the short side. A margin of K −H is required for the spread consisting of a long
call with strike K and a short call with strike H, when H ≤K. The margin resulting from
a representation or “ decomposition” is the sum of the margins attached to each call spread.
The investor is presumably able to choose the best possible representation. A simple linear
programming computation will show that 30 is the resulting minimum—much more than
the negative of the worst possible future value of the position!
REMARK 3.1.
This 30 seems to be the result of an attempt to bound the largest payout
which the investor might have to make at the end of the period. In this method, the current
value of his account must be at least as large as the current value of the calls plus 30.
REMARK 3.2.
A careful reading of the SEC rules reveals that one must
i.
ﬁrst mark the account (reference instruments plus calls) to market,
ii.
deduct the market value of the calls (long or short),
iii.
then deduct the various “margins” required for the spreads in the chosen decomposition (we shall call the total the “margin”),
iv.
and then check that this is at least 0.
In the framework of Deﬁnition 2.3, this bears some analogy to
i.
marking to market both the positions in the “risky” instruments as well as in the
reference one,
ii.
subtracting the market value of the risky part,
iii.
making sure that the difference is positive.
We now formalize the special role played by the call spreads, which we call “standard
risks,” and the natural margin requirements on them in the SEC rules approach to risk

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
measurement, following the lines of Rudd and Schroeder (1982, Sec. 4; see also Cox and
Rubinstein 1985, pp. 107–109). Given some underlying security, we denote by CK the
European call with exercise price K and exercise date equal to the end of the holding
period, and by SH,K the spread portfolio consisting of “one long CH, one short CK,” which
we denote by CH −CK. These spreads shall be “standard risks” for which a simple rule
of margin requirement is given. They are then used to “support” general portfolios of calls
and provide conservative capital requirements.
We describe the extra capital requirement for a portfolio A consisting of aH calls CH,
H ∈H, H a ﬁnite set of strikes. For simplicity we assume that P
H aH = 0; that is, we
have no net long or short position. The exchange allows one to compute the margin for
such a portfolio A by solving the linear programming problem
inf
nH,K
X
H,K,H̸=K
nH,K(H −K)+
(3.1)
under the conditions that
for all H, K, H ̸= K, we have nH,K ≥0
and
A =
X
H,K,H̸=K
nH,K SH,K.
This program provides the holder of portfolio A with the cheapest decomposition ensuring
that each spread showing in it has a nonnegative net worth at date T.
Going one step further than Rudd and Schroeder (1982, pp. 1374–1376), we write explicitly the dual program
sup
νK
X
K
νKaK,
(3.2)
where the sup is taken over all (νK) satisfying νH −νK ≤(H −K)+.
For the interpretation of this dual problem, we rewrite the preceding program with the
negative πK of the dual variables, obtaining
inf
πK
X
K
πKaK
(3.3)
under the conditions that
πH −πK ≥−(H −K)+
or
πH −πK ≥0
if H < K
and
πH −πK ≥K −H
if H > K,
the last inequalities being rewritten as
πK −πH ≤H −K
if H > K.
(3.4)

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
Notice that if we interpret πH as the cash ﬂows associated with the call CH at expiration
date T , the objective function in (3.3) is the cash ﬂow of the portfolio A at expiration.
The duality theorem of linear programming ensures that the worst payout to the holder of
portfolio A, under all scenarios satisfying the constraints speciﬁed in problem (3.3), cannot
be larger than the lowest margin accepted by the exchange. The exchange is therefore sure
that the investor commitments will be fulﬁlled.
It is remarkable that the primal problem (3.1) did not seem to refer to a model of distribution for future prices of the call. Yet the duality results in an implicit set of states of nature
consisting of call prices—with a surprise! Our example of portfolio A in the beginning of
this section has shown indeed that the exchange is, in some way, too secure, as we now
explain.
It is well known that the cash ﬂows of the calls must satisfy the constraints (3.4) speciﬁed
for problem (3.3) (and indeed many other constraints such as convexity as a function of
strike; see Merton 1973, Thm. 8.4). For the speciﬁc portfolio A studied in Section 3.2,
the set of strikes is H = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50}, and an optimal primal solution is given by
n∗
10,20 = 2, n∗
40,50 = 1, n∗
40,30 = 3, all others n∗
H,K = 0, for a minimal margin of 30. The
cash ﬂows are given by π∗
10 = π∗
20 = π∗
30 = 10 and π∗
40 = π∗
50 = 0, which provides the
value −30 for the minimal cash ﬂow of the portfolio at expiration. However, this minimal
cash ﬂow corresponds to cash ﬂows for the individual options which cannot arise for any
stock price. Indeed, if the stock price at expiration is S, the cash ﬂow of CH is (S −H)+,
which is obviously convex in H. Thus, since π∗
20 + π∗
40 < 2π∗
30, these π’s cannot arise as
cash ﬂows for any terminal stock price. Brieﬂy, there are too many scenarios considered,
because some of them are impossible scenarios.
The convexity of the call price as a function of the strike can be derived from the fact
that a long “butterﬂy” portfolio as B20 = C10 −2C20 + C30 must have a positive price.
Therefore, we submit this butterﬂy to the decomposition method and write it as a sum of
spreads S10,20 + S30,20, which requires a margin of 10. If we instead take the approach
of Section 2, looking at random variables, more precisely at the random net worth at the
end of the holding period, we realize that the butterﬂy never has negative net worth, or,
equivalently, that the net loss it can suffer is never larger than its initial net worth. The
butterﬂy portfolio should therefore be margin free, which would imply a margin of only 10
for the original portfolio A = 2B20 + 2B30 −B40. In our opinion it is not coherent in this
setting to have only the spreads SH,K (for H ≤K) as margin-free portfolios. The method
uses too few standard risks.
In Section 4.2 we present a framework for extensions of risk measurements of “standard risks” and give conditions under which our construction actually produces coherent
measures of risk. The results of Section 4.1 on scenario representation of coherent measures will allow interpretation of the extension in terms of scenarios attached to the original
measurement.
3.3. Some Model-Dependent Rules Based on Quantiles
The last example of measures of risk used in practice is the value at risk (VaR) measure. It
is usually deﬁned in terms of net wins or P/L and therefore ignores the difference between
money at one date and money at a different date, which, for small time periods and a
single currency, may be acceptable. It uses quantiles, which requires us to pay attention to
discontinuities and intervals of quantile numbers.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
DEFINITION 3.2. Quantiles.
Given α ∈]0, 1[, the number q is an α-quantile of the random variable X under the probability distribution P if one of the three equivalent properties
below is satisﬁed:
i.
P [X ≤q] ≥α ≥P [X < q],
ii.
P [X ≤q] ≥α and P [X ≥q] ≥1 −α,
iii.
FX(q) ≥α and FX(q−) ≤α with FX(q−) = limx→q,x<q F(x), where FX is the
cumulative distribution function of X.
REMARK 3.3.
The set of such α-quantiles is a closed interval. Since Ä is ﬁnite, there is
a ﬁnite left (respectively, right) end point q−
α (respectively, q+
α ) that satisﬁes q−
α = inf{x |
P [X ≤x] ≥α} [equivalently sup{x | P [X ≤x] < α}] (resp. q+
α = inf{x | P [X ≤x] >
α}). With the exception of at most countably many α the equality q−
α = q+
α holds. The
quantile q−
α is the number F←−(α) = inf{x | P{X ≤x} ≥α} deﬁned in Embrechts,
Kl¨uppelberg, and Mikosch (1997, Def. 3.3.5; see also Dufﬁe and Pan 1997).
We formally deﬁne VaR in the following way.
DEFINITION 3.3. Value at risk measurement.
Given α ∈]0, 1[, and a reference instrument r, the value-at-risk VaRα at level α of the ﬁnal net worth X with distribution P is the
negative of the quantile q+
α of X/r; that is,
VaRα(X) = −inf{x | P [X ≤x · r] > α}.
REMARK 3.4.
Notice that what we are using for deﬁning VaRα is really the amount of
additional capital that a VaRα-type calculation entails.
REMARK 3.5.
We have here what is called an “internal” model in the Basel Committee
Amendment (1996), and it is not clear whether the (estimated) physical probability or a
“well-chosen” subjective probability should be used.
We will now show that, although it satisﬁes properties T, PH, and M, VaRα fails to satisfy
the subadditivity property.
Consider as an example, the following two digital options on a stock, with the same
exercise date T , the end of the holding period. The ﬁrst option, A, with an initial price of u,
pays 1000 if the value of the stock at time T is more than a given U, and nothing otherwise.
The second option, B, with an initial price of l, pays 1000 if the value of the stock at T is
less than L (with L < U), and nothing otherwise.
Choosing L and U such that P[ST < L] = P[ST > U] = 0.008, we look for the 1
percent values at risk of the future net worths of positions taken by two traders writing,
respectively, two options A and two options B. They are −2·u and −2·l, respectively (with
r supposed to be one). By contrast, the positive number 1000 −l −u is the 1 percent value
at risk of the future net worth of the position taken by a trader writing A + B. This implies
that the set of acceptable net worths (in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.4 applied to the value at risk
measure) is not convex. Notice that this is even a worse feature than the nonsubadditivity
of the measurement. We give below one more example of nonsubadditivity.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
REMARK 3.6.
We note that if quantiles are computed under a distribution for which all
prices are jointly normally distributed, then the quantiles do satisfy subadditivity as long
as probabilities of exceedence are smaller than 0.5. Indeed, σX+Y ≤σX + σY for each pair
(X, Y) of random variables. Since for a normal random variable X we have
VaRα(X) = −(EP[X] + 8−1(α) · σP(X)),
with 8 the cumulative standard normal distribution and since 8−1(0.5) = 0, the proof of
subadditivity follows.
REMARK 3.7.
Several works on quantile-based measures (Dowd 1998; Risk Magazine
1996; RiskMetrics 1995) consider mainly the computational and statistical problems they
raise, without ﬁrst considering the implications of this method of measuring risks.
REMARK 3.8.
Since the beginning of this century, casualty actuaries have been involved
in computation and use of quantiles.
Indeed, the choice of initial capital controls the
probability of ruin at date T . Loosely speaking, “ruin” is deﬁned in (retrospective) terms
by the negativity, at date T, of the surplus, deﬁned to be
Y = capital at date 0 + premium received −claims paid (from date 0 to date T ).
Imposing an upper bound 1−α on the probability of Y being negative determines the initial
capital via a quantile calculation (for precise information, see the survey article by Hans
B¨uhlmann 1990).
Under some circumstances, related to Remark 3.6 above (see Daykin, Pentikainen, and
Pesonen 1994, pp. 157, 168), this “capital at risk” is a measure that possesses the subadditivity property. For some models the surplus represents the net worth of the insurance
ﬁrm at date T . In general, the difﬁculty of assigning a market value to insurance liabilities
forces us to distinguish surplus and net worth.
REMARK 3.9.
We do not know of organized exchanges using value at risk as the basis
of risk measurement for margin requirements.
For a second example of nonsubadditivity, brieﬂy allow an inﬁnite set Ä and consider two
independent identically distributed random variables X1 and X2 having the same density
0.90 on the interval [0, 1] and the same density 0.05 on the interval [−2, 0]. Assume that
each of them represents a future random net worth with positive expected value—that is
a possibly interesting risk. Yet, in terms of quantiles, the 10 percent values at risk of X1
and X2 being equal to 0, whereas an easy calculation showing that the 10 percent value at
risk of X1 + X2 is certainly larger than 0, we conclude that the individual controls of these
risks do not allow directly a control of their sum, if we were to use the 10 percent value at
risk.
Value at risk measurement also fails to recognize concentration of risks. A remarkably
simple example concerning credit risk is due to Albanese (1997). Assume that the base rate
of interest is zero, and that the spreads on all corporate bonds is 2 percent, and that these
bonds default, independently from company to company, with a (physical) probability of

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
1 percent. If an amount of 1,000,000 borrowed at the base rate is invested in the bonds of
a single company, the 5 percent value at risk of the resulting position is negative, namely
−20,000, and there is “no risk.”
If, in order to diversify, the whole amount is invested equally into bonds of 100 different
companies, the following occurs in terms of value at risk. Since the probability of at least
two companies defaulting is greater than 0.18, it follows that the portfolio of bonds leads
to a negative future net worth with a probability greater than 0.05: diversiﬁcation of the
original portfolio has increased the measure of risk, but the “piling-up” of risky bonds
issued by the same company had remained undetected. We should not rely on such a
“measure.”
Value at risk also fails to encourage a reasonable allocation of risks among agents, as can
be seen from the following simple example. Let Ä consist of three states ω1, ω2, ω3 with
respective probabilities 0.94, 0.03, 0.03. Let two agents have the same future net worth X
with X(ω1) ≥0, X(ω2) = X(ω3) = −100. If one uses the 5 percent value at risk measure,
one would not ﬁnd sufﬁcient an extra capital (for each agent) of 80. But this same capital
would be found more than sufﬁcient for each agent if, by a risk exchange, the two agree
on the modiﬁed respective future net worths Y and Z, where Y(ω1) = Z(ω1) = X(ω1),
Y(ω2) = Z(ω3) = −120, Y(ω3) = Z(ω2) = −80. This is not reasonable because the
allocation (X + 80, X + 80) Pareto dominates the allocation (Y + 80, Z + 80) if the agents
are risk averse.
In conclusion, the basic reasons to reject the value at risk measure of risks are the
following:
(a)
value at risk does not behave nicely with respect to the addition of risks, even
independent ones, thereby creating severe aggregation problems.
(b)
the use of value at risk does not encourage and, indeed, sometimes prohibits diversi-
ﬁcation because value at risk does not take into account the economic consequences
of the events, the probabilities of which it controls.
4. REPRESENTATION THEOREMS FOR COHERENT RISK MEASURES
This section provides two representations of coherent risk measures. The ﬁrst corresponds
exactly to the SPAN example of Section 3.1 and the second is the proper generalization of the
NASD/SEC examples of Section 3.2. These representation results are used in Section 5.2 to
provide an example of algorithm to measure risks in trades involving two different sources
of randomness, once coherent measures of risks for trades dealing with only one of these
sources have been agreed upon.
4.1. Representation of Coherent Risk Measures by Scenarios
In this section we show that Deﬁnition 3.1 provides the most general coherent risk
measure: any coherent risk measure arises as the supremum of the expected negative of
ﬁnal net worth for some collection of “generalized scenarios” or probability measures on
states of the world. We continue to suppose that Ä is a ﬁnite set, otherwise we would also
get ﬁnitely additive measures as scenarios.
The σ-algebra, 2Ä, is the class of all subsets of Ä. Initially there is no particular probability measure on Ä.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
PROPOSITION 4.1.
Given the total return r on a reference investment, a risk measure ρ
is coherent if and only if there exists a family P of probability measures on the set of states
of nature, such that
ρ(X) = sup{EP[−X/r] | P ∈P}.
REMARK 4.1.
We note that ρ can also be seen as an insurance premium principle. In
that case, denoting by R the physical measure, we ﬁnd that the condition R ∈P (or in the
convex hull of this set) is of great importance. This condition is translated as follows: for
all X ≤0 we have ER[−X/r] ≤ρ(X).
REMARK 4.2.
The more scenarios considered, the more conservative (i.e., the larger) is
the risk measure obtained.
REMARK 4.3.
We remind the reader about Proposition 3.1. It will prove that Axiom R
is satisﬁed by ρ if and only if the union of the supports of the probabilities in P is the whole
set Ä of states of nature.
Proof of Proposition 4.1.
(1)
We thank a referee for pointing out that the mathematical content of Proposition 4.1,
which we had proved on our own, is already in Huber (1981). We therefore simply
identify the terms in Huber, Proposition 2.1 (Chap. 10), with our terminology of
risks and risk measure.
(2)
The sets Ä and M of Huber are our set Ä and the set of probabilities on Ä. Given
a risk measure ρ we associate with it the functional E∗by E∗(X) = ρ(−r · X).
Axiom M for ρ is equivalent to Property (2.7) of Huber for E∗, Axioms PH and T
together are equivalent to Property (2.8) for E∗, and Axiom S is Property (2.9).
(3)
The “if” part of our Proposition 4.1 is obvious. The “only if” part results from the
“representability” of E∗, since Proposition 2.1 of Huber states that
ρ(X) = E∗(−X/r) = sup{EP [−X/r] | P ∈Pρ},
where Pρ is deﬁned as the set
{P ∈M | for all X ∈G: EP [X] ≤E∗(X) = ρ(−r · X)}
= {P ∈M | for all Y ∈G: EP [−Y/r] ≤ρ(Y)}.
REMARK 4.4.
Model risk can be taken into account by including in the set P a family
of distributions for the future prices, possibly arising from other models.
REMARK 4.5.
Professor B¨uhlmann kindly provided us with references to works by
Hattendorf (1868), Kanner (1867), and Wittstein (1867), which he had mentioned in his
G¨ottingen presentation (B¨uhlmann 1995). These authors consider, in the case of insurance
risks, possible losses only, neglecting the case of gains. For example, risk for a company
providing annuities is linked to the random excess number of survivors over the expected

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
number given by the lifetable. Several of these references, for example Hattendorf (Sec. 3,
p. 5), contain an example of a risk measure used in life insurance, namely the “mittlere
Risico” constructed out of one scenario, related to the life table used by a company. It is
deﬁned as the mathematical expectation of the positive part of the loss, as “die Summe aller
m¨oglichen Verluste, jeden multipliciert in die Wahrscheinlichkeit seines Eintretens.” This
procedure deﬁnes a risk measure satisfying Axioms S, PH, and M.
REMARK 4.6.
It is important to distinguish between a point mass scenario and a simulation trial: the ﬁrst is chosen by the investor or the supervisor, the second is chosen randomly
according to a distribution they have prescribed beforehand.
Conclusion.
The result in Proposition 4.1 completely explains the occurrence of the ﬁrst
typeofactualriskmeasurement, theonebasedonscenarios, asdescribedinSection3.1. Any
coherent risk measure appears therefore as given by a “worst case method” in a framework of
generalized scenarios. At this point we emphasize that scenarios should be announced to all
traders within the ﬁrm (by the manager) or to all ﬁrms (by the regulator). In the ﬁrst case, we
notice that decentralization of risk management within the ﬁrm is available only after these
announcements. Yet, inquantile-basedmethods, evenaftertheannouncementsofindividual
limits, there remains a problem preventing decentralized risk management: two operators
ignorant of each other’s actions may well each comply with their individual quantile limits
and yet no automatic procedure provides for an interesting upper bound for the measure of
the joint risk due to their actions. As for the regulation case we allow ourselves to interpret
a sentence from Stulz (1996): “regulators like Value at Risk, because they can regulate it”
as pointing to the formidable task of building and announcing a reasonable set of scenarios.
4.2. Construction of Coherent Risk Measures by Extension of Certain Risk Measurements
We now formalize the attempts described in Section 3.2 to measure risks. Their basis is
to impose margin requirements on certain basic portfolios considered as “standard risks,” to
use combinations of those risks to “support” other risks and then bound from above required
capital, using the margins required for standard risks.
DEFINITION 4.1. Supports of a risk.
Given a set Y of functions on Ä, we consider a
family, indexed by Y, of nonnegative numbers µ = (µY)Y∈Y, all of them but a ﬁnite number
being zero, and we say that the couple (µ, γ ), where γ is a real number, “supports” X, for
X ∈G, provided
X ≥
X
Y∈Y
µYY + γ · r.
The set of all such (µ, γ ) which support X will be denoted by SY(X).
The idea is now to use these “supports,” made of “standard risks,” to bound above possible
extensions of a function 9 deﬁned on a subset of G. A consistency condition is required to
avoid supports leading to inﬁnitely negative values.
CONDITION 4.1.
Given a set Y of functions on Ä, and a function 9: Y −→R, we
say that 9 fulﬁlls Condition 4.1 if for each support (µ, γ ) of 0, we have the inequality
P
Y∈Y µY9(Y) −γ ≥0.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
PROPOSITION 4.2.
Given a set Y of functions on Ä and a function 9: Y −→R, the
equality
ρ9(X) =
inf
(µ,γ )∈SY(X)
X
Y∈Y
µY9(Y) −γ
deﬁnes a coherent risk measure ρ9, if and only if 9 fulﬁlls Condition 4.1. If so, ρ9 is the
largest coherent measure ρ such that ρ ≤9 on Y.
Proof of Proposition 4.2.
(1)
The necessity of Condition 4.1 is obvious.
(2)
Since (0, 0) is a support of the element X = 0 of G and since Condition 4.1 ensures
thatanysupportof0providesanonnegativenumber, weﬁndthatρ9(0) = 0.Notice
that if Condition 4.1 is violated then we would get ρ9(0) = −∞.
(3)
Axiom S required from a coherent risk measure follows here from the relation
SY(X1 + X2) ⊃SY(X1) + SY(X2), and Axiom PH is satisﬁed since, given λ > 0,
(µ, γ ) supports X if and only if (λ · µ, λ · γ ) supports λ · X.
(4)
For a support (µ, γ ) of a risk X let us call the number P
Y∈Y µY9(Y)−γ the “cost”
of the support. By noticing, for each risk X and each real α, that the support (µ, γ )
for X +α ·r provides the support (µ, γ −α) for X, at a cost lower by the amount α
than the cost of the support of X + α ·r, we ﬁnd that ρ9(X) = ρ9(X + α ·r) + α.
Axiom T is therefore satisﬁed by ρ9.
(5)
Since for X ≤Z we have SY(Z) ⊃SY(X), Axiom M is satisﬁed by ρ9.
(6)
For any coherent measure ρ with ρ ≤9 on Y, we must have, for any support (µ, γ )
of X, the inequality ρ(X) ≤P
Y∈Y µY9(Y) −γ and therefore ρ(X) ≤ρ9(X).
REMARK 4.7.
As opposed to the case of scenarios-based measures of risks, the fewer
initial standard risks are considered, the more conservative is the coherent risk measure
obtained. This is similar to what happens with the SEC rules because Section 3.2 showed
us that too many scenarios, and dually, too few standard risks, were considered.
Condition 4.1 allows one to consider the function ρ9 in particular on the set Y, the set of
prespeciﬁed risks. There, it is clearly bounded above by the original function 9. An extra
consistency condition will prove helpful in ﬁguring out whether ρ9 is actually equal to 9
on Y.
CONDITION 4.2.
Given a set Y of functions on Ä and a function 9: Y −→R, we say
that Condition 4.2 is satisﬁed by 9 if for each element Z ∈Y and each support (µ, γ ) of
Z we have 9(Z) ≤P
Y∈Y µY9(Y) −γ.
REMARK 4.8.
It is an easy exercise to prove that Condition 4.2 implies Condition 4.1.
PROPOSITION 4.3.
GivenasetY offunctionsonÄandafunction9: Y −→Rsatisfying
Condition 4.2, the coherent risk measure ρ9 is the largest possible extension of the function
9 to a coherent risk measure.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
Proof of Proposition 4.3.
(1)
Condition 4.2 just ensures that the value at Z ∈Y of the original function 9 is
bounded above by the sum obtained with any support of Z, hence also by their
inﬁmum ρ9(Z), which proves that ρ9 = 9 on Y.
(2)
Let ρ be any coherent risk measure, which is also an extension of 9. Since ρ ≤9
on Y, Proposition 4.2 ensures that ρ ≤ρ9.
Propositions 4.2 and 4.3 above applied to (Y, 9) = (G, ρ) provide a statement similar
to Proposition 4.1 about representation of coherent risk measures.
PROPOSITION 4.4.
A risk measure ρ is coherent if and only if it is of the form ρ9 for
some 9 fulﬁlling Condition 4.1.
REMARK 4.9.
It can be shown that for a coherent risk measure ρ built as a ρ9, the
following set of probabilities
P9 = {P | for all X ∈G: EP[−X/r] ≤9(X)}
is nonempty and veriﬁes the property
ρ(X) = sup{EP[−X/r] | P ∈P9}.
4.3. Relation between Scenario Probabilities and Pricing Measures
The representation result in Proposition 4.1 allows us to approach the problem of risk
concentration for coherent risk measures.
If the position consisting of the short Arrow–Debreu security corresponding to state of
nature ω has a nonpositive measure of risk (i.e., bankruptcy in the state ω is “allowed”),
the market price of this security should also be nonpositive. To formalize this observation
we suppose an arbitrage-free market, and we denote by Qr the closed convex set of pricing
probability measures on Ä, using the instrument r as num´eraire. Given the coherent risk
measure ρB,r associated with r and to an acceptance set B, simply denoted by ρr (see
Proposition 2.2), it will be natural to assume the following condition.
CONDITION 4.3.
The closed convex set Pρr of probability measures deﬁning the coherent
risk measure ρr has a nonempty intersection with the closed convex set Qr of probability
pricing measures.
When Condition 4.3 is satisﬁed, there is some Q ∈Qr such that, for any future net
worth Y, EQ [−Y/r] ≤ρr(Y); hence if Y has a strictly negative price under Q it cannot
be accepted. We interpret this fact in the following manner: if a ﬁrm can, by trading, add
a position Y to its portfolio and receive cash at the same time, without having any extra
capital requirement, then there is a bound to the quantity of Y which the ﬁrm can add this
way without triggering a request for extra capital.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
If Condition 4.3 is not satisﬁed, then there exists a future net worth Y such that
sup{EQ [Y/r] | Q ∈Qr} < inf{ES [Y/r] | S ∈Pρr }.
Hence, for each pricing measure Q we have EQ [−Y/r] > ρr(Y) and therefore the future
net worth Z = Y + ρr(Y) · r satisﬁes both conditions ρr(Z) = 0 and EQ [Z/r] < 0. As a
result we have an acceptable position with strictly negative price, a situation that may well
lead to an undetected accumulation of risk.
5. TWO APPLICATIONS OF REPRESENTATIONS
OF COHERENT RISK MEASURES
5.1. A Proposal: The “Worst Conditional Expectation” Measure of Risk
Casualty actuaries have long been computing pure premium for policies with deductible,
using the conditional average of claim size, given that the claim exceeds the deductible
(see Hogg and Klugman 1984). In the same manner, reinsurance treaties have involved
the conditional distribution of a claim for a policy (or of the total claim for a portfolio of policies), given that it is above the ceding insurer’s retention level.
In order to
tackle the question of “how bad is bad,” which is not addressed by the value at risk measurement, some actuaries (see Albrecht 1993; Embrechts 1995) have ﬁrst identiﬁed the
deductible (or retention level) with the quantile used in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial risk measurement. We prove below that one of the suggested methods gets us close to coherent risk
measures.
Considering the “lower partial moment” or expectation of the “shortfall,” the presentation
in Albrecht (1993) would translate, with our paper’s notations, into measuring a risk X by
the number EP [min (0, −VaRα(X) −X)] .
The presentations in Bassi, Embrechts, and Kafetzaki (1998) and Embrechts (1995) use
instead the conditional expectation of the shortfall given that it is positive. The quoted texts
(see also Embrechts et al. 1997, Def. 3.4.6, as well as the methods indicated there to estimate
the whole conditional distribution) present the terminology “mean excess function.” We
suggest the term “tail conditional expectation” since we do not consider the excess but the
whole of the variable X.
DEFINITION 5.1. Tail conditional expectation (or “TailVaR”).
Given a base probability
measure P on Ä, a total return r on a reference instrument, and a level α, the tail conditional
expectation is the measure of risk deﬁned by
TCEα(X) = −EP [X/r | X/r ≤−VaRα(X)] .
DEFINITION 5.2. Worst conditional expectation.
Given a base probability measure P on
Ä, a total return r on a reference instrument, and a level α, the worst conditional expectation
is the coherent measure of risk deﬁned by
WCEα(X) = −inf{EP [X/r | A] | P [A] > α}.
REMARK 5.1.
TCEα has been suggested as a possible ingredient of reinsurance treaties

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
(see Amsler 1991).
PROPOSITION 5.1.
We have the inequality TCEα ≤WCEα.
Proof of Proposition 5.1.
(1)
Let us denote X/r by Y. If FY(q+
α (Y)) > α, the set A = {ω | Y(ω) ≤q+
α(Y)} is
one used in the deﬁnition of WCEα, hence the claim is true.
(2)
If FY(q+
α (Y)) = α, it follows from the deﬁnition of q+
α and the monotonicity of
FY that, for each ε > 0, FY(ε + q+
α (Y)) > α. Hence, setting Aε = {ω | Y(ω) ≤
ε + q+
α (Y)}, we get
WCEα(X) ≥−EP [Y | Aε] = −EP
Y · 1Aε
P [Aε]
Since FY is right-continuous, limε→0 P [Aε] = FY(q+
α (Y)) and Aε ↓A0, so the
right-hand side has the limit −EP [Y | A0] = TCEα(X).
Albanese (1997) made numerical studies of portfolios built out of collections of risky
bonds, looking for a coherent measure that dominates the value at risk measurement and
yet gets close to it on a speciﬁc bond portfolio.
We interpret and generalize this search as the problem of a ﬁrm constrained by the
supervisors along the lines of the quantile risk measurement. Nevertheless, the ﬁrm wishes
at the same time to operate on a coherent basis, at the lowest possible cost. Proposition 5.4
will provide circumstances where the ﬁrm’s problem has a clear-cut solution.
PROPOSITION 5.2.
For each risk X one has the equality
VaRα(X) = inf {ρ(X) | ρ coherent and ρ ≥VaRα}
The proof will use the following lemma.
LEMMA 5.1.
If ρ is the coherent risk measure deﬁned by a set P of probability measures,
then ρ ≥VaRα if and only if for each B with P [B] > α and each ε > 0 there is a Q ∈P
with Q [B] > 1 −ε.
Proof of Lemma 5.1.
(1)
Necessity: take X = −r · 1B where P [B] > α. Clearly VaRα(−r · 1B) = 1 and
hence ρ(−r · 1B) ≥1. This implies that for each ε > 0 there exists Q ∈P with
Q [B] ≥1 −ε.
(2)
Sufﬁciency: let −k = VaRα(X), then P [X ≤k · r] ≥α and for each δ > 0 we
have P [X ≤(k + δ) · r] > α.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
Let Q ∈P be chosen such that Q [X ≤(k + δ) · r] ≥1 −δ. We obtain EQ [−X/r] ≥
(−k −δ) · (1 −δ) −δ · ∥X/r∥. Since δ > 0 was arbitrary we ﬁnd that ρ(X) ≥−k.
Proof of Proposition 5.2.
(1)
Given any risk X let again −k = VaRα(X). Then P [X ≤k · r] ≥α and, for each
δ > 0, P [X ≤(k + δ) · r] > α. We will construct a coherent risk measure ρ such
that ρ ≥VaRα and ρ(X) ≤VaRα(X) + δ.
(2)
For any set B with P [B] > α, we must have P [B ∩{X ≥k · r}] > 0 and we can
deﬁne h B as 1B∩{X≥k·r}/P [B ∩{X ≥k · r}] and QB = h B · P. Lemma 5.1 shows
that the measure ρ built with all the QB dominates VaRα, but for X we obtain
ρ(X) = supQB EQB [−X/r] ≤−k = VaRα(X).
Deﬁnition 3.1 and Proposition 3.1 allow one to address a question by Ch. Petitmengin,
Soci´et´e G´en´erale, about the coherence of the TCEα measure.
PROPOSITION 5.3.
Assume that the base probability P on Ä is uniform. If X is a risk
such that no two values of the discounted risk Y = X/r in different states are ever equal,
then TCEα(X) = WCEα(X).
Proof of Proposition 5.3.
(1)
Given α ∈]0, 1[ let us denote −VaRα(X) by q, the set {X ≤q · r} by B, and the
various values of Y = X/r by y1 < y2 < · · · < yn.
(2)
Let k be the integer with 0 ≤k < n such that α ∈[ k
n , k+1
n ). We will prove that
−VaRα(X) = q+
α (Y) = q = yk+1.
(3)
For each u > q we have
#{i | yi ≤u}
n
> α,
hence the integer #{i | yi ≤u} being strictly greater than α · n is at least k + 1.
(4)
By taking u = yk+1 we actually minimize the integer #{i | yi ≤u} and therefore
prove the point stated in item (2).
(5)
The set Y(B) is the set {y1, . . . , yk+1} and
TCEα(X) = −E [X/r | X ≤q · r] = −y1 + · · · + yk+1
k + 1
(6)
Any set C containing at least k + 1 states of nature and different from B will
provide values for −Y averaging to strictly less than TCEα(X), which therefore
equals WCEα(X).
PROPOSITION 5.4.
Assume that the base probability P on Ä is uniform. If a coherent
risk measure ρ only depends on the distribution of the discounted risk and is greater than
the risk measure VaRα, then it is greater than the WCEα (coherent) risk measure.

P. ARTZNER, F. DELBAEN, J.-M. EBER, AND D. HEATH
Proof of Proposition 5.4.
(1)
Given a risk X, we denote −VaRα(X) simply by q and X/r by Y.
The set
A = {ω | Y(ω) ≤q} has cardinality p > n · α and A is written after possible
renumbering as A = {ω1, ω2, . . . , ωp} with Y(ωi) ≤Y(ωi+1) for 1 ≤i ≤p −1.
(2)
Deﬁne ¯Y(ωi) for i ≤p as y∗= (Y(ω1) + · · · + Y(ωp))/p = E [Y | Y ≤q] and
as Y(ωi) otherwise.
(3)
For a permutation σ of the ﬁrst p integers, we deﬁne Y σ by Y σ(ωi) = Y(ωσ(i))
for 1 ≤i ≤p, and Y σ(ωj) = Y(ωj) for p + 1 ≤j ≤n. We then ﬁnd that ¯Y is
also the average of the p! random variables Y σ.
(4)
The assumption that, for each risk Z, ρ(Z) only depends on the distribution of
Z/r implies that all the ρ(r ·Y σ) are equal to ρ(X). The convexity of the function
ρ then implies the inequality ρ(X) ≥ρ(r · ¯Y).
(5)
The last assumption made on ρ implies that ρ(r · ¯Y) ≥VaRα(r · ¯Y).
(6)
We have VaRα(r · ¯Y) = −y∗= E [−Y | Y ≤q] since, for i ≤p, ¯Y(ωi) ≤Y(ωp).
Hence ρ(X) ≥E [−X/r | X ≤q · r].
(7)
For a dense set of random variables X on the ﬁnite state space Ä we have, by Proposition 5.3, the equality E [−X/r | X ≤q · r] = WCEα(X); hence the inequality
ρ(X) ≥WCEα(X) holds for a dense set of elements X of G.
(8)
Both risk measures ρ and WCEα are coherent, hence continuous, functions on G.
The inequality ρ ≥WCEα is therefore true on the whole of G.
5.2. Construction of a Measure Out of Measures on Separate Classes of Risks
It is important to realize that Proposition 4.3 can be applied to a set Y of risks having
no structure. It can be the union of a family (Yj)j∈J of sets of risks, where for each j a
function (9j) is given on Yj in such a way that 9j = 9j′ on Yj ∩Yj′. The function 9 is
then deﬁned by its restrictions to each of the Yj.
The different sets Yj may be exchange-based risks on the one hand and over-the-counter
risks on the other hand, or market risks and credit risks in a framework where a joint internal
model would be looked for. Similarly, multiline aggregated combined risk optimization
tools (see Shimpi 1998) would call for a combined measure of risks. The functions 9j may
come from preliminary rules given by exchanges and/or by regulators (see Basel Committee
Amendment 1996). Assuming that Condition 4.2 is being satisﬁed, which will depend on
inequalities satisﬁed by the 9j, Proposition 4.3 allows one to mechanically compute a
coherent risk measure extending the family of the 9j and dominating any other possible
coherent risk measure chosen by exchanges and/or by regulators to extend the family of
the 9j. It therefore provides a conservative coherent tool for risk management.
In the special case of Ä = Ä1 × Ä2 with given coherent risk measures ρi, i = 1, 2, on
Gi, we deﬁne Yi as the set of all functions on Ä which are of the form fi ◦pri, where fi is
any function on Äi and where pri is the projection of Ä on its ith factor. We also deﬁne 9i
on Yi by the equality 9i( fi ◦pri) = ρi( fi). Since Y1 ∩Y2 consists of the constants, the
functions 91 and 92 are equal on it and they deﬁne a function 9 on Y = Y1 ∪Y2 which
satisﬁes Condition 4.2.
Let Pi be the set of scenarios deﬁning ρi and let P be the set of probabilities on Ä with
marginals in P1 and P2, respectively. We claim that the risk measure ρ9 on the set G of
functions on Ä (the largest coherent risk measure extending both 91 and 92) is equal to the
risk measure ρP, generated as in Deﬁnition 3.1 by the scenarios in P.

COHERENT MEASURES OF RISK
PROPOSITION 5.5.
The two coherent risk measures ρP and ρ9 are equal.
Proof of Proposition 5.5.
The restriction of ρP to Yi equals 9i because for each function
fi on Äi we have
ρP( fi ◦pri) = sup{EP[−fi ◦pri/r] | P ◦pr−1
∈P1, P ◦pr−1
∈P2}
= sup{EP◦pr−1
i [−fi/r] | P ◦pr−1
i
∈Pi}
= ρi( fi) = 9i( fi ◦pri),
which proves that ρP ≤ρ9.
To prove the reverse inequality we use point (3) in the proof of Proposition 4.1 and show
that if a probability Q on Ä is such that, for each function X on Ä, EQ[−X/r] ≤ρ9(X),
then Q has its marginals Q1 and Q2 in P1 and P2, respectively. Choose indeed X = fi ◦pri.
We ﬁnd that EQ[−fi ◦pri/r] = EQi[−fi/r], which proves that for each fi ∈Gi one has
EQi[−fi/r] ≤ρ9( fi ◦pri), and therefore Qi ∈Pi.