As market intermediaries, electricity retailers buy electricity from the wholesale market
or self generate for re(sale) on the retail market. Electricity retailers are uncertain about
how much electricity their residential customers will use at any time of the day until they
actually turn switches on. While demand uncertainty is a common feature of all commodity
markets, retailers generally rely on storage to manage demand uncertainty. On electricity
markets, retailers are exposed to joint quantity and price risk on an hourly basis given the
physical singularity of electricity as a commodity. In the literature on electricity markets,
few articles deals on intra-day hedging portfolios to manage joint price and quantity risk
whereas electricity markets are hourly markets. The contributions of the article are twofold.
First, we deﬁne through a VaR and CVaR model optimal portfolios for speciﬁc hours (3am,
6am, .
,12pm) based on electricity market data from 2001 to 2011 for the French
market. We prove that the optimal hedging strategy diﬀers depending on the cluster hour.
Secondly, we demonstrate the signiﬁcantly superior eﬃciency of intra-day hedging portfolios
over daily (therefore weekly and yearly) portfolios. Over a decade (2001-2011), our results
∗Associate Professor, Department of Applied Economics, PSB Paris School of Business, 59 rue Nationale 75013 Paris France.
†Universit´e Paris 8 (LED), 2 rue de la Libert´e, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex, France. Researcher of the
Chaire European Electricity markets (CEEM) of Paris Dauphine University.
‡London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton Street, WC2A 2AE, London, England.
This paper has beneﬁted from the support of the Chaire European Electricity Markets of the Paris
Dauphine Foundation, supported by RTE, EDF and EPEX Spot. The views and opinions expressed in
this Working Paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the partners of the
CEEM.

clearly show that the losses of an optimal daily portfolio are at least nine times higher than
the losses of optimal intra-day portfolios.