IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
A Medium-Term Integrated Risk Management Model
for a Hydrothermal Generation Company
Jordi Cabero, Student Member, IEEE, Álvaro Baíllo, Member, IEEE, Santiago Cerisola,
Mariano Ventosa, Associate Member, IEEE, Antonio García-Alcalde, Fernando Perán, and Gregorio Relaño
Abstract—This paper presents a methodology to manage the
market risk faced by a hydrothermal generation company in the
medium-term (one year). This risk is due to uncertainty in fuel
prices, power demand, water inﬂows, and electricity prices. The
proposed methodology includes three steps: the generation of scenarios for these random parameters, the approximation of these
scenarios by a multivariate scenario tree, and the optimization of
the company’s operational and ﬁnancial hedging decisions under
a stochastic programming framework. The optimization model
permits the representation of a diversiﬁed generation portfolio and
measures risk exposure by means of conditional value-at-risk. A
realistic numerical example is solved to illustrate the possibilities
of our approach.
Index Terms—Conditional value-at-risk, generation operation
planning, integrated risk management, risk analysis, stochastic
optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
D
URING the last decade, the electric power industry has undergone an intense process of reforms. In the new deregulated context, power generation companies are exposed to the
risks associated with uncertain factors inherent to their business.
These risks arise in all the activities that constitute the generation business from both an operational and a ﬁnancial perspective [1].
In the short term (one day to one month), a generation company faces operational risks associated with uncertain factors
such as the unexpected failure of a generation unit or the ﬂuctuation of demand due to, for example, unforeseen temperature
changes. Additionally, it is exposed to ﬁnancial risks associated
with the volatility of electricity prices [2].
In the medium term (several months to a few years), operational risks can be identiﬁed in the procurement of the minimum
required amount of fuel or the availability of natural resources
due to uncertain water inﬂows. From the ﬁnancial perspective,
the variety of risks is much wider than in the short term. The
company is exposed to market risk associated with the uncertain evolution of forward electricity and fuel prices. Credit risk
is due to the possibility of counter-party default. Currency risk
is suffered by companies engaged in transactions with different
Manuscript received July 27, 2004; revised April 7, 2005. This work was
supported by Iberdrola. Paper no. TPWRS-00407–2004.
J. Cabero, Á. Baíllo, S. Cerisola, and M. Ventosa are with the Instituto de
Investigación Tecnológica, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería, Universidad
Pontiﬁcia Comillas, Madrid, Spain (e-mail: jordi.cabero@iit.upco.es).
A. García-Alcalde, F. Perán, and G. Relaño are with Iberdrola, S.A., Spain.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2005.851934
currencies, so that the value of their portfolios is affected by
changes in exchange rates. Liquidity risk is related to changes
in the bid-ask spread on futures transactions.
In the long term (more than three years), operational risks are
related, for example, to the construction of generation plants.
The role of ﬁnancial risks is even more important than in the
medium term. The impact of changes in interest rates is a good
example.
This paper focuses on the medium-term problem faced by a
generation company when planning the operation of its units
in the presence of uncertainty. This problem should include not
only pure operational decisions, but also risk management decisions. Risk management is the process of analyzing exposure to
risk and determining how to best handle such exposure. There
are ﬁnancial instruments speciﬁcally designed to manage risk
such as futures contracts, options, etc. Additionally, production
resources can be used to manage risk to a certain extent. This
combined perspective is what some authors have named integrated risk management [3]. The combination of these two aspects of the generation business in a decision-support model requires the explicit representation of the operation of the generation units, as well as measuring the risk exposure of the company
due to the mentioned sources of uncertainty.
The integrated risk management problem has already been
considered by different authors (see [4]–[6]). References [4]
and [5] represent the generation system with special emphasis
on hydro production and uncertainty of water inﬂows, while
treating thermal resources, subject to fuel price uncertainty,
in less detail or not considering them at all. In contrast, [6]
mainly focuses on thermal generation, particularly CCGTs.
However, all these authors neglect the strategic interaction of
generation companies in the wholesale electricity market. As
a consequence, they isolate the company from its competitors
and assume that the uncertain spot price of electricity is independent of the company’s operation strategy and the risk
management decisions. In this paper, we propose a methodology that explicitly considers this interaction by means of an
equilibrium model.
With respect to the risk measuring methodology used to guide
the risk management process, other authors consider two different approaches. In [4] and [5], each scenario in which the
company’s proﬁt is lower than a certain objective value is penalized. This has the advantage of not requiring a constraint
that couples the different scenarios (when a scenario exceeds
the loss limit it is penalized irrespective of the situation of the
rest of scenarios). A disadvantage of this method is that it does
not impose an explicit limit for the losses that the company may
0885-8950/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
face. In [6] conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) is used as risk measure. This establishes a hard limit on the expected value of losses
for the subset of scenarios in which the shortfall exceeds the
value-at-risk (VaR) at a given conﬁdence level [7]. For a comprehensive theoretical and computational comparison and classiﬁcation of some risk measures see [8]. In this paper, we have
chosen CVaR as risk measure.
The mathematical formulation of the medium-term integrated
risk management problem of a generation company leads to a
multistage stochastic program that can be solved using different
techniques. In [5], the stochastic dual dynamic programming
(SDDP) approach proposed in [9] is used in order to deal with
such large-scale problems. In addition, [10] formulates a general
multistage stochastic programming problem with mixed integer
variables, using CVaR as risk measure, highlighting a two-stage
procedure to solve the problem. In contrast, in [4] and [6], the
equivalent deterministic problem is solved with a commercial
optimizer.
This paper represents a step forward with respect to previous
approaches in the ﬁeld of managing the medium-term risk
faced by a hydrothermal generation company. We propose a
methodology with the following salient features. Firstly, we
consider uncertainty in a variety of factors, such as water
inﬂows, demand, electricity prices, fuel prices, and exchange
rates. Secondly, we generate scenarios for the wholesale electricity market taking into account the effects of the strategic
interaction between generation companies by means of an
equilibrium model. Thirdly, we represent the uncertainty faced
by the generation company in the form of a scenario tree
constructed with state-of-the-art techniques. Fourthly, we formulate the integrated risk-management problem as a multistage
stochastic linear programming model that we solve via its
equivalent deterministic problem with a commercial optimizer.
Although the model permits a risk penalization approach, we
have speciﬁcally designed it to use CVaR as risk measure due
to its better risk and mathematical properties.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a general description of the considered problem, whereas Section III
explains in detail the methodology we have used to tackle this
problem. Section IV presents the mathematical formulation of
the integrated risk management model we have developed. Section V illustrates the performance of this model with a realistic
numerical example. Finally, Section VI summarizes the main
conclusions of our research.
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe the medium-term market risk
management problem of a hydrothermal generation company.
A. Medium-Term Hydrothermal Coordination
In a regulated environment, the medium-term hydrothermal
coordination problem consists of satisfying the demand for
power of a certain region over a time horizon ranging from
several months to a few years at the minimum generation cost.
Unless strictly necessary, network constraints are neglected. In
general, hydro reserves are scarce and reservoirs have lower
and upper limits. This complicates the decision of when is best
to use hydro resources to substitute thermal generation. The
explicit consideration of fuel stocks increases the complexity of
the problem. Researchers have developed complicated models
to address this problem and powerful optimization techniques
to obtain numerical results [11]–[14].
In recent years, the hydrothermal coordination problem in
a competitive context has been addressed as an equilibrium
problem. In [15] it is shown how generation companies should
manage their hydro resources so that their water value equals
their thermal marginal cost and their marginal revenue in the
wholesale electricity market. In [16], a dual dynamic programming approach is proposed in which the problem of each
stage is modeled as a Cournot equilibrium. In [17] and [18],
a realistic hydrothermal coordination problem, including an
explicit representation of the wholesale market equilibrium, is
formulated and solved as a complementarity problem.
In this paper, we address the medium-term integrated riskmanagement problem of a hydrothermal generation company.
The combination of a risk-management perspective with the
classical hydrothermal coordination approach poses modeling
and computational difﬁculties. For the sake of clarity, we have
intentionally avoided the representation of certain technical aspects of the operation of thermal units or hydro plants. For example, we are using an equivalent model that comprises all the
hydro generation units located in the same basin, which implies that we are not taking into account head effects or complications such as the presence of hydro units owned by other
companies in the same basin. These simpliﬁcations indicate that
our methodology is not speciﬁcally oriented to derive a detailed medium-term generation schedule for the company of interest, but rather to suggest medium-term guidelines both from
a risk-management and an operational point of view, in accordance with the integrated perspective that we propose.
B. Sources of Uncertainty
As mentioned, the medium-term hydrothermal coordination
problem of a generation company is subject to several sources
of uncertainty. This suggests adopting a stochastic programming
framework.
There are sources of uncertainty that are present in the
medium term irrespective of the regulatory framework. These
are water inﬂows, the evolution of the demand for power and
of fuel prices, the availability of generation units, and the
variability of exchange rates. Some of these uncertain factors
might not imply risks for generation companies in a regulated
context. However, this has radically changed with deregulation.
In this paper, we consider these aspects using two different approaches. On the one hand, we incorporate the stochasticity of
water inﬂows, demand and fuel prices into the construction of
the scenario tree. Although we do not include them in the model
formulation, we treat currency exchange rates essentially in
the same way. On the other hand, we reduce the net maximum
power output of each thermal unit in each month to its historic
average available capacity. This yields more realistic results in
terms of spot prices for on-peak hours and energy produced by
peaking units.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CABERO et al.: A MEDIUM-TERM INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR A HYDROTHERMAL GENERATION COMPANY
With the advent of competition, new sources of uncertainty
arise due to the unpredictable behavior of agents when participating in the different market mechanisms. This leads to uncertain wholesale electricity prices and uncertain sales of different
products (energy, reserve, capacity). In this paper we take into
account the uncertainty of the amount of energy that the generation company is able to sell at each load level, as well as of
the price at which this energy is sold in the construction of the
scenario tree.
C. Integrated Risk Management
A generation company typically prepares annual budgets
which include an estimate of the proﬁts obtained during the
year. In addition, the company must be able to evaluate whether
the probability of facing a low-proﬁt outcome is higher than
desired. This requires analyzing the operating proﬁt of the
generation company under a relevant number of uncertainty
realizations.
This simulation approach would yield a probability distribution function for the annual proﬁt of the generation company.
Given this probability distribution, one could consider the possibility of ﬁnding a hedging strategy to improve the worst scenarios.
As mentioned above, there are two mechanisms that a generation company can use in order to manage market risk. The
ﬁrst one is to participate in futures markets for the different underlying assets (electricity, fuel, currency). The second one is to
change its operational decisions, which implies that the probability function of the operating proﬁt should be constructed at
the same time as the hedging strategy is decided. This is what
we understand by integrated risk management.
Current planning practice in many generation companies is
far from this integrated perspective. In many cases, operation
planning decisions are taken without considering the market risk
exposure of the generation company. In this context, a methodology such as the one we propose may serve as a ﬁrst step toward
the objective of combining both points of view.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
This section presents the methodology we propose in order to
address the integrated medium-term risk management problem
of a hydrothermal generation company (Fig. 1).
A. Scenario Generation
Scenarios are possible realizations of the stochastic variables
up to the end of the time horizon. As usual in stochastic programming, we discretize continuous time into periods of time.
In this paper,we consider a one-year time horizon and divide it
into different time periods depending on the random variable
under consideration. In particular, we distinguish two types of
random variables: electric market variables and exogenous variables.
Random electric market variables include power demand,
electricity prices and power produced by the company. We
discretize electric market variables into load levels so that
Fig. 1.
Proposed approach.
each month includes several of these load levels (Fig. 2). This
permits representing the typical short-term volatility of power
prices, although we assume that uncertainty unfolds in monthly
periods. We discretize the rest of random variables (fuel prices,
water inﬂows, or exchange rates) in monthly periods.
Generating scenarios in this context requires a deep knowledge of the underlying probability distribution functions
including correlations between the different random variables.
In some cases, two variables may be correlated because they
share a common explanatory variable (e.g., water inﬂows and
demand both depend on weather). In other cases correlation
is due to a cause-effect relationship (e.g., fuel prices, water
inﬂows and demand have a clear impact on electricity prices).
It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a full description of the methodology followed to generate the scenarios for
power demand, water inﬂows or fuel prices (see [19]).
In contrast, one of the main contributions of this paper is to
propose the use of a fundamental model (in particular, an equilibrium model [17]) rather than an econometric model to derive
the scenarios for electricity prices and the power produced by
the company. This contribution can be justiﬁed from a number
of points of view.
It is evident that both approaches can model the inﬂuence
of fuel prices, water inﬂows and power demand on electricity spot prices. An econometric model can incorporate
this inﬂuence through some type of correlation based on
historical data, whereas a fundamental model uses fuel
prices, water inﬂows and power demand to determine the
power output of the different generation companies and,
as a byproduct, the spot price of electricity.
In principle, an econometric model cannot foresee the correlation between variables for a situation that is structurally different from one observed in the past (e.g., if a
new generation plant begins to operate at a certain moment of the year or if a merger between two generation
companies takes place). An equilibrium model provides
an answer to this question.
Deciding the power output of the generation company in
each load level using as input data the electricity spot
prices given by an econometric model is not an easy task.
The spot price of electricity and the power output of the
different generation companies are the result of their interaction in the wholesale market. Hence, it seems more
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 2.
Discretization of one week into load levels.
reasonable to simultaneously obtain both types of variables (prices and power outputs). We do so by means of
the equilibrium model.
The use of equilibrium models to represent competition between generation companies in wholesale electricity markets
is nowadays a mature line of research [20]. Among a variety
of modeling approaches, Cournot model of equilibrium has received much attention. In this framework each generation company
is assumed to decide the production level
that maximizes its proﬁt given the production level of the rest of companies. The price of electricity is expressed as a decreasing function of the total amount of power generated by the companies.
This function (the inverse demand function) establishes a link
between the decisions taken by the different companies thus
representing their interaction in the wholesale electricity market
(Fig. 3).
When applying Cournot equilibrium model to the case of
power generation, researchers have included a more or less detailed representation of the generation units so that a byproduct
is a production proﬁle for each of the companies. This is one of
the outputs of our equilibrium model that we are interested in
(Fig. 1).
With respect to the other output, pure Cournot equilibrium
models tend to provide higher prices than those observed in reality. Researchers have addressed this problem by introducing
the concept of conjectured variations which aims to represent
the fact that rivals do react to high prices by producing more
[21], [22].
Nevertheless, the manner in which we use the equilibrium
model to derive scenarios for the spot price of electricity and
for the company’s power output implies some important simplifying assumptions.
We are obtaining each annual scenario of the spot price
of electricity and of the company’s output by formulating
and solving the deterministic equilibrium problem corresponding to one annual scenario of fuel prices, hydro
inﬂows and demand for power. This is obviously a simpliﬁcation because, in this setting, generation companies
owning hydro reservoirs can decide in which month it is
Fig. 3.
Equilibrium computing of a power generation market.
more proﬁtable to use its hydro reserves with perfect information about the future.
We are assuming that the company’s power output for
each load level will not change in the risk management
stage of our methodology. In other words, in the risk management stage we consider as input data the company’s
output given by the equilibrium model for each load level
and each scenario. Hence, the risk management model decides the generation units that should produce this power
(hydrothermal coordination), e.g., shifting hydro production between months to reduce the level of risk exposure
(integrated risk management). The underlying assumption
is that the impact of the companies’ hedging strategies on
the market equilibrium is small.
B. Multivariate Scenario-Tree Construction
Once the generated scenarios represent accurately enough the
space of probability for the medium-term integrated risk management problem, we suggest the construction of a multivariate
scenario tree. The random variables considered for this scenario
tree are the company’s power production, the spot price of electricity, the spot price of the different fuels, and water inﬂows. A
scenario tree provides a representation of uncertainty that permits the application of stochastic programming techniques [23].
1) Scenario-Tree Construction Techniques: The problem of
scenario-tree construction has been addressed by many authors.
[24] propose a heuristic moment-matching method that is
speciﬁcally used to ﬁnd the discrete tree-structured distribution
whose statistical parameters best approximate those of the
underlying distribution. [25] and [26] extend the concept of
clustering techniques to obtain a collection of representative
scenarios that are forced to share part of their nodes up to
predetermined ramiﬁcation nodes. The technique we have used
to construct scenario trees is similar to the one described in
[26].
2) Treating Arbitrage Opportunities: The construction of a
scenario tree with the purpose of evaluating the possibility of
entering into forward contracts to hedge against the volatility
of prices in the spot market requires some discussion on the
relationship between forward and spot prices.
If we denote random variables with bold characters, let
be
the spot price for each time period , and
the forward price
in period
for delivery in period
(Fig. 4). In order to evaluate
a hedging operation in the ﬁrst node of the scenario tree with
delivery in period , the company must compare the spot price
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CABERO et al.: A MEDIUM-TERM INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR A HYDROTHERMAL GENERATION COMPANY
Fig. 4.
Two-stage four-scenario tree.
expected for period ,
, with the forward price in the ﬁrst
period for delivery in period ,
. If
then there
is an arbitrage opportunity: The company can increase its expected proﬁt by making a forward sale of
. The only costs of
this operation are the transaction costs
. On the other
hand, if
the company can increase its expected
proﬁt by buying
forward contracts. In both cases the company increases its expected proﬁt without increasing its risk exposure.
In this paper, we consider a nonarbitrage approach in order to
avoid arbitrage opportunities. This implies that forward prices
must be equal to the corresponding expected spot prices. A difﬁ-
culty arises in the ﬁrst node of the tree for which forward prices
are already known. It is likely that the expected spot price for
a certain time period
seen from this ﬁrst node,
, is not
equal to the current forward price for delivery in ,
. This
requires adjusting the scenario tree, which can be done by modifying either transition probabilities or spot-price scenarios [26].
By doing so, the expected spot price for a certain time period is
forced to be equal to the current forward price for that period.
An alternative would be to admit that there can be arbitrage
opportunities due to insufﬁcient liquidity in the forward market
or to information asymmetry between the different agents.
Under the assumption of limited liquidity, transaction costs in
the forward market should be high, in order to limit the volume
of contracts that is proﬁtable to trade.
C. Medium-Term Portfolio Optimization
Given
the
scenario
tree,
the
medium-term
integrated
risk-management problem can be formulated and solved
as a multistage stochastic programming problem, including
both operational and risk management decisions.
1) Representation of the Generation Portfolio: The representation of the medium-term operation of a generation
system has been extensively treated both in a competitive and a
noncompetitive framework. However, when addressing the risk
management problem of a generation company, authors have
focused on a particular generation technology, either thermal
[2], [6] or hydro [4], [5].
In our model, we represent in detail the operation of the generation units of a company with a diversiﬁed portfolio, taking
as input data both the power that the company produces in each
load level and each scenario, which is a step forward with respect to previous works. The power output of each generation
unit in each scenario and the expected proﬁt obtained by the
company in the electricity market are model outputs.
Fig. 5.
CVaR concept.
2) Representation of the Financial Portfolio: Our representation of the medium-term ﬁnancial portfolio of a generation
company takes as input data the forward and spot prices of different commodities (electricity, fuel, etc.) The possibility of entering on forward contracts for commodities other than electricity (fuel, currencies, etc.) is also an original feature of our
model.
We manage risk in our model by imposing a lower limit
on CVaR. For a given time horizon
and conﬁdence level
is the conditional expectation of the proﬁt
above
. As an alternative to VaR, CVaR is attractive
since it is a coherent risk measure [27]. The concept of CVaR is
illustrated in Fig. 5.
CVaR as a risk measure has interesting properties such
as
translation
invariance,
subadditivity,
positive
homogeneity,
monotonicity,
relevance,
consistency
with
ﬁrstand
second-order
stochastic
dominance,
and
convexity.
Second-order stochastic dominance represents risk aversion for a rational agent, whereas convexity is a remarkable
mathematical programming property. Moreover, CVaR (for
discrete random variables) can be modeled by means of linear
expressions. The several advantages of CVaR in the optimization of a power portfolio have already been described in [1].
IV. MODEL FORMULATION
This section presents the formulation of the integrated
risk-management problem.
Parameters and variables are
denoted with upper and lower case symbols, respectively.
Stochastic parameters and variables are represented in bold
symbols.
A. Representing Uncertainty
As we have explained in Section III, continuous time has been
discretized into periods,
to
, and the uncertainty of parameters and variables has been represented by means of a multivariate scenario tree. This approach assumes that the decision
process is nonanticipative.
In order to represent a scenario tree in a mathematical programming problem, there are several possibilities. One choice
is to formulate a deterministic problem for each scenario and
then incorporate nonanticipativity constraints, which forces the
decisions taken in each node shared by two or more scenarios to
be equal. An alternative to this scenario-based formulation is to
adopt a node-based formulation specifying the relationship that
exists between each node and its ancestor. For simplicity, the
formulation presented in this paper does not explicitly follow
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
either of these two approaches, although it does highlight stochastic parameters and variables with bold characters.
B. Objective Function
As mentioned in Section III, the integrated risk management
problem maximizes the expected value of the company’s proﬁts,
, subject to certain risk exposure limitations
(1)
The company’s annual proﬁt is calculated as the sum of the
company’s proﬁt in each time period ,
(2)
is obtained as the sum of the proﬁts due to the operation
of the company’s generation units,
, and the proﬁts due to the
ﬁnancial contracts signed by the company in each period
for delivery in period ,
(3)
1) Operation Proﬁts:
is calculated as the difference between operation revenues,
, and operation costs,
(4)
Operation revenues are given by
(5)
where
is the duration of each load level
, in hours;
is the spot price of electricity, in Euro/MWh;
represents the
power output of each thermal unit , in MW; and
the power
output of each hydro unit , in MW.
Operation costs are calculated as
(6)
where
are unit ’s variable O&M costs, in Euro/MWh;
is
unit ’s average fuel consumption, in MWh (HHV)/MWh; and
is the spot price of unit ’s fuel, , in each time period ,
in Euro/MWh (HHV).
2) Financial Proﬁts:
quantiﬁes the company’s proﬁts
due to its ﬁnancial contracts signed in period
for delivery in
period
over underlying assets such as electricity and different
fuels
(7)
In both types of commodities, proﬁts due to ﬁnancial contracts are calculated as the difference between revenues and
costs
(8)
(9)
In order to calculate the company’s revenues due to the settlement of forward electricity contracts,we assume that the company has a net selling position. In each time period , the company has the possibility of making a forward sale (purchase) of
power for delivery in period
and load level
. We denote the
amount of power implied in such a forward sale (purchase) by
), in MW. Such an operation will yield a revenue
that is proportional to the difference between the price of the
forward contract
and the spot price of electricity in period
. Hence, the company’s revenues due to the settlement of
its ﬁnancial contracts signed in period
for delivery in period
are calculated as follows:
(10)
In contrast, when calculating the company’s revenues due to
the settlement of forward fuel contracts we assume that the company has a net buying position
(11)
where
is the duration of period , in hours;
is the spot
price of fuel
in period , in Euro/MWh;
is the forward
price of fuel
in period for delivery in period , in Euro/MWh;
) represents the purchases (sales) of fuel
forward, in
megawatts, in period
for delivery in period .
In both kinds of underlying assets, transaction costs include
not only the bid-ask spread, but also costs associated to liquidity
risk. We model transaction costs as a convex piecewise linear
function of the traded volume of forward contracts. In the case
of forward electricity contracts
(12)
where
are the different sections of the piecewise linear function;
is the slope of each section
, in Euro/MWh; and
is the
-intercept, in Euro/h.
A similar expression is used for fuel contracts
(13)
C. Generation Representation
1) Company’s Power Output: As mentioned, the company’s
power output in each load level,
, is considered as input data
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CABERO et al.: A MEDIUM-TERM INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR A HYDROTHERMAL GENERATION COMPANY
for the integrated risk management problem. This power output
is provided by the company’s thermal and hydro units
(14)
2) Water Reservoir Management: A generation company
owning hydro reservoirs has the possibility of managing hydro
reserves to partially hedge against low-proﬁt scenarios. For
example, hydro reserves can be saved to protect against particularly dry scenarios, although this may increase the probability
of spilling water if a particularly wet scenario ﬁnally occurs.
Hence, we consider the amount of water in each reservoir
at
the end of each month
to be a variable,
, that depends on
hydro production,
, and inﬂows,
, during that month as
well as of the level of reserves at the end of the previous month:
(15)
3) Take-or-Pay Contracts: We assume the company has entered into one natural gas take-or-pay contract for each gas unit
in each period
(16)
where
and
are the minimum and maximum quantities of
natural gas implied by the take-or-pay contract for period , in
MWh.
D. Financial Portfolio Representation
As mentioned, in order to avoid arbitrage opportunities, we
force forward prices in periods different from the ﬁrst one to be
equal to the corresponding expected spot prices
(17)
(18)
E. Risk Modeling
As mentioned, we manage risk by means of a risk measure,
CVaR, which can be modeled with linear expressions (see [6]
and [7]).
Let
be a random variable representing the proﬁts of a certain portfolio. If
is the probability distribution function of
, the VaR for a conﬁdence level
, is given by
(19)
The mean level of proﬁts lower than
is known
as
(20)
In order to formulate CVaR by means of linear expressions,
we deﬁne a new random positive variable
, which measures
negative proﬁt deviations from
(21)
Fig. 6.
Coal prices.
Using this negative variable, CVaR can be calculated as
(22)
where
is the expected proﬁt, in Euro, of those
scenarios with proﬁts lower than
V. CASE STUDY
The model formulated in this paper has been developed and
implemented in GAMS [28]. In this section, we present the results obtained for a realistic numerical example in which we
address the risk management problem of a ﬁctitious Spanish
hydrothermal generation company during year 2004. We have
created this ﬁctitious company by aggregating generation units
belonging to different real companies.
A. Scenario Generation
The ﬁrst step of our methodology is to generate scenarios for
the random variables. We have generated 1000 possible realizations for fuel prices, water inﬂows, and power demand. We
have considered the correlation between the different variables
(e.g., between natural gas prices and oil prices) and the correlation between time periods (e.g., between hydro inﬂows in two
consecutive months). The realizations of the different random
variables (except power demand) are represented in Figs. 6–9,
in light gray.
Considering these random variables as input data, we have
used an equilibrium model to obtain, for each scenario, the company’s power production and the spot price of electricity, for
each load level in each time period. The scenarios obtained for
both random variables are represented in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively, in light gray. As can be seen, our discretization of
time into load levels (Fig. 2) leads to price and production series
with two spikes in each month, corresponding to the on-peak
load level of weekdays and of weekends, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 7.
Natural gas prices.
Fig. 8.
Oil prices.
Fig. 9.
Water inﬂows.
Fig. 10.
Company’s power output.
Fig. 11.
Electricity price.
B. Scenario-Tree Construction
Once these 1000 multivariate scenarios have been generated,
we have clustered them into the multivariate 64-scenario tree
of Fig. 12 using techniqes similar to those described in [26].
The resulting scenario tree is represented in Figs. 6–11. It is
important to notice that each ﬁgure represents the same scenario
tree under different perspectives. It is clear that the scenario tree
provides an approximation that seems better for some variables
(e.g., coal prices) than for others (e.g., oil prices), although it is
the best that we have obtained for the set of variables with this
tree structure.
C. Portfolio Optimization
The last step is to perform the optimization of the portfolio
of the generation company based on the resulting scenario tree.
This results in a problem with 225 000 variables and 100 000
equations that we have solved in a Pentium IV, 1800-MHz (512
MB RAM) in 65 s.
Fig. 13 shows the efﬁcient frontier obtained for this problem
with different CVaR limits. This ﬁgure provides the maximum
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CABERO et al.: A MEDIUM-TERM INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR A HYDROTHERMAL GENERATION COMPANY
Fig. 12.
Proposed scenario-tree structure.
Fig. 13.
Efﬁcient frontier.
achievable expected proﬁt for each level of risk (CVaR) or, alternatively, the minimum achievable level of risk (CVaR) for each
expected proﬁt. As can be seen, an increase of CVaR of about
6% reduces the expected proﬁt in 0.07%.
In Fig. 14, we represent the probability distribution functions
of the proﬁts that the company obtains for each level of risk
(CVaR) imposed. As we increase the value of CVaR, the probability distribution of the company’s proﬁts gets narrower.
D. From Theory to Practice
The line of research followed by this and other related papers
is part of the cultural change that is taking place in generation
companies throughout the world as a result of the process of
liberalization of the power industry.
The potential use of this type of methodology depends directly on the existence of liquid futures markets where the agents
can carry out hedging operations with a relatively low cost.
In some cases, such as the Scandinavian power market, an
organized futures market has been in operation for several years
Fig. 14.
Proﬁts distribution function.
and has reached a satisfactory level of liquidity. This justiﬁes
the great interest shown both by academic and practitioners in
this type of developments.
In the Spanish context, the future development of the Iberian
Market of Electricity (MIBEL) will bring an Iberian Futures
Market. The advent of such a marketplace will trigger the need
for tools similar to the ones we describe. The development of
a methodology to address the problems that will arise in this
setting will surely be a valuable asset when the time comes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a methodology to address the
integrated risk management problem of a hydrothermal generation company. The methodology includes three main steps: the
generation of scenarios for the relevant random variables, the
approximation of these scenarios by means of a scenario tree,
and the optimization of the company’s decisions under a stochastic programming framework. Although this methodology
may appear as the application of common sense, there are a
number of relevant features that make our proposal original.
Firstly, we have adopted a combined approach to generate the
scenarios for the random variables. For some of them (power
demand, hydro inﬂows, fuel prices), we obtain scenarios using
techniques that have already been developed by other authors. In
contrast, we suggest using an equilibrium model that correctly
reﬂects that the price of electricity can be different from the
marginal cost of generation to obtain scenarios for electricity
price and for the company’s power production.
Secondly, our integrated risk management model permits the
representation of a wide variety of generation technologies as
well as the inclusion of contracts over underlying commodities such as electricity or fuels. It maximizes the company’s expected proﬁt subject to a risk exposure limitation. We evaluate
this exposure with a coherent risk measure, CVaR.
Finally, we have tested our methodology with a realistic numerical example in the context of the Spanish electricity market.
The results obtained in a reasonable computation time conﬁrm
the validity of our approach and offer a good perspective for further research.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Portland General Electric. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 08:02:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, AUGUST 2005
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the Iberdrola’s Analysis and Processes Unit (ANPRO) for their signiﬁcant support. We have also
beneﬁted from the insightful comments and suggestions of three
anonymous referees.