A concept for the optimization of nonlinear functions using particle swarm methodology is introduced.
The evolution of several paradigms is outlined, and an implementation of one of the paradigms is
discussed. Benchmark testing of the paradigm is described, and applications, including nonlinear
function optimization and neural network training, are proposed. The relationships between particle
swarm optimization and both artificial life and genetic algorithms are described,
1 INTRODUCTION
This paper introduces a method for optimization of continuous nonlinear functions. The method was
discovered through simulation of a simplified social model; thus the social metaphor is discussed,
though the algorithm stands without metaphorical support. This paper describes the particle swarm
optimization concept in terms of its precursors, briefly reviewing the stages of its development from
social simulation to optimizer. Discussed next are a few paradigms that implement the concept.
Finally, the implementation of one paradigm is discussed in more detail, followed by results obtained
from applications and tests upon which the paradigm has been shown to perform successfully.
Particle swarm optimization has roots in two main component methodologies. Perhaps more obvious
are its ties to artificial life (A-life) in general, and to bird flocking, fish schooling, and swarming theory
in particular. It is also related, however, to evolutionary computation, and has ties to both genetic
algorithms and evolutionary programming. These relationships are briefly reviewed in the paper.
Particle swarm optimization as developed by the authors comprises a very simple concept, and
paradigms can be implemented in a few lines of computer code. It requires only primitive
mathematical operators, and is computationally inexpensive in terms of both memory requirements and
speed. Early testing has found the implementation to be effective with several kinds of problems. This
paper discusses application of the algorithm to the training of artificial neural network weights,
Particle swarm optimization has also been demonstrated to perform well on genetic algorithm test
functions. This paper discusses the performance on Schaffer's f6 function, as described in Davis [l].
2 SIMULATING SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
A number of scientists have created computer simulations of various interpretations of the movement of
organisms in a bird flock or fish school. Notably, Reynolds [8] and Heppner and Grenander [4]
presented simulations of bird flocking. Reynolds was intrigued by the aesthetics of bird flocking
choreography, and Heppner, a zoologist, was interested in discovering the underlying rules that enabled
large numbers of birds to flock synchronously, often changing direction suddenly, scattering and
regrouping, etc. Both of these scientists had the insight that local processes, such as those modeled by
0-7803-2768-3/95/$4.00 0
1995 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TE