IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Optimization of Electricity Retailer’s Contract
Portfolio Subject to Risk Preferences
Janne Kettunen, Member, IEEE, Ahti Salo, and Derek W. Bunn
Abstract—When an electricity retailer faces volume risk in
meeting load and spot price risk in purchasing from the wholesale
market, conventional risk management optimization methods can
be quite inefﬁcient. For the management of an electricity contract
portfolio in this context, we develop a multistage stochastic optimization approach which accounts for the uncertainties of both
electricity prices and loads, and which permits the speciﬁcation of
conditional-value-at-risk requirements to optimize hedging across
intermediate stages in the planning horizons. Our experimental
results, based on real data from Nordpool, suggest that the modeling of price and load correlations is particularly important. The
sensitivity analysis is extended to characterize the behavior of
retailers with different risk attitudes. Thus, we observe that a risk
neutral retailer is more susceptible to price-related than load-related uncertainties in terms of the expected cost of satisfying the
load, and that a risk averse retailer is especially sensitive to the
drivers of the forward risk premium.
Index Terms—Electricity market, retailer’s contract portfolio
optimization, risk management, stochastic optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
E
LECTRICITY retailers face the problem of meeting instantaneous and variable loads which they may need to
satisfy by purchasing electricity from wholesale power markets
through spot and forward contracts. Optimizing this process is
socially important and analytically challenging, incorporating
volume as well as extreme price risks [1], [2]. Wholesale power
is increasingly being produced and traded via exchanges as an
energy commodity, but its stochastic characteristics and risks are
inﬂuenced by its delivery as an essential service to end-users.
As a consequence, with companies facing uncertainties about
their future loads as well as prices, the development of optimization models that allow power utilities to make appropriate
production and trading decisions to maximize expected proﬁts
within speciﬁc risk constraints [3]–[10] presents extreme and
special characteristics compared to other commodities and ﬁ-
nancial markets [11], [12]. Electricity cannot be stored, but customers expect a high standard of service, and thus utilities bear
Manuscript received April 02, 2009; revised July 20, 2009. First published
November 17, 2009; current version published January 20, 2010. This work
was supported in part by the Jenny and Antti Wihuri foundation and in part by
the Research Foundation of the Helsinki University of Technology. Paper no.
TPWRS-00233-2009.
J. Kettunen is with the Haskayne School of Business and Institute for Sustainable Energy, Environment, and Economy, University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB T2N 1N4, Canada (e-mail: jskettun@ucalgary.ca).
A. Salo is with the Systems Analysis Laboratory, Helsinki University of Technology, 02015 TKK Helsinki, Finland (e-mail: ahti.salo@tkk.ﬁ).
D. W. Bunn is with Decision Science at London Business School, London
NW1 4SA, U.K. (e-mail: dbunn@london.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2032233
load as well as price risk. Furthermore, spot price and load are
correlated, often in a nonlinear manner, as in the example we
report later where the correlation is stronger at higher levels of
load. Both load and price time series exhibit daily, weekly and
annual seasonality, volatility clustering (periods of low and high
variance in the time series), mean reversion (a tendency for the
time series to revert to a stationary average), and in the case of
prices, forward risk premiums (persistent differences between
the forward prices and their expected spot prices) are ampli-
ﬁed through the irregular, but not infrequent, spot price spikes
that emerge at times of resource scarcity. A distinctive methodological challenge is, therefore, to formulate a multi-period contract portfolio that incorporates the correlated price and demand
risks, both of which evolve stochastically in path-dependent processes, such that risks are managed efﬁciently throughout the
contracting horizon.
Conventional approaches to constructing the forward contract portfolio have approximated the stochastic processes of
the electricity prices and loads using simulations, moment
matching, and models adapted from ﬁnancial markets. These,
however, have not included the correlation between price and
load. For example, [13] simulates uncertainties accounting for
mean-reversion based on an extended Ornstein–Uhlenbeck
process [14], [15] construct their scenario trees using Monte
Carlo simulation and a scenario reduction technique [6], [16]
uses scenarios that are based upon user-speciﬁed moments;
while various ﬁnancial market models have been used in
electricity markets to model options and the dynamics of the
forward prices [17]–[21]. Overall, there exists an extensive
line of research in scenario generation techniques [22]–[27],
but, as far as we are aware, contract portfolio optimization
within power risk management has not adequately reﬂected
the correlation between load and spot prices. In this paper,
we seek to be innovative in adapting the HSS scenario tree
building method [28]–[30] to capture this correlation within an
optimized contract risk management process.
In risk management, research has mostly focused on extreme
risks. For example, [7] focuses upon “value-at-risk” (VAR) measures, which are the extreme fractiles of the loss distributions,
to constrain expected losses at a given level of conﬁdence. But,
although VAR is the de facto standard for risk compliance monitoring in the ﬁnancial sector [31], it is not a “coherent” (deﬁned
later) risk measure [32]–[36] and hence may not capture correctly the portfolio diversiﬁcation beneﬁts. Consequently, conditional-VAR (CVAR), which measures the weighted average
loss of the tail events, for a given fractile, is “coherent” and theoretically preferable [35]. Furthermore, since it can be formulated
using linear programming [37], CVAR constraint portfolio opti-
0885-8950/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
mizations have gained popularity [13], [15], [38]–[40]. Hence,
we use CVAR as our key risk measure and show that by specifying multiple constraints in intermediate time periods as well
as at the end, it is possible to control for risk throughout the contract spanning horizon.
Speciﬁcally, we develop a contract portfolio optimization
method, using multistage stochastic optimization [41], formulated primarily from the perspective of an electricity retailer
who is contractually obliged to fulﬁll an uncertain demand 1)
by buying electricity from the spot market and 2) by hedging
spot price exposure with forward contracts for later delivery of
electricity. The retailer seeks to minimize the expected cost of
establishing these contracts subject to various risk constraints
[13], [15], [38]. The problem is also analogous to that faced
by an electricity generator who must produce electricity at
an uncertain load level and sell this electricity at an uncertain
spot price in a setting where it can also use forward contracts
for hedging [42], [43]. In this journal, this topic has been
considered from the generator side by [44] and [45] and in a
retailer setting by [46]–[49]. We extend these approaches by
considering a dynamic forward portfolio. Hence, the retailer
can purchase and sell forwards over multiple time periods
depending on the evolution of the electricity prices and loads.
The contract portfolio optimization model presented here is
innovative in that it integrates 1) correlation between spot price
and demand, 2) risk premiums in forward contracts, and 3) temporal risk preferences in intermediate time periods over the contracting horizon. Results from numerical experiments with real
data from Nordpool indicate that it is essential to model the
demand and price correlations to achieve efﬁciency. They also
yield some behavioral insights. For example, a risk neutral retailer is more susceptible to price-related than load-related uncertainties in terms of the variability in the cost of satisfying the
demand, whereas a risk averse retailer is more sensitive to the
risk premium and demand-related uncertainties.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the
decision problem, Section III develops the portfolio optimization approach, and Section IV presents numerical results which
are based on empirical data. Section V concludes with a discussion of practical implications and future research directions.
II. DECISION PROBLEM
The problem is formulated from the perspective of the electricity retailer, who has to serve electricity demand through purchases from the spot and forward wholesale markets. However,
both the demand and the spot electricity prices are uncertain.
They are both assumed to follow a mean reverting processes,
i.e., deviations from the local average price and load are expected to revert back to the local averages. This is a standard
model in power and other energy commodities [10], [50]. Furthermore, deviations from the averages show volatility clustering, i.e., periods of high and low volatilities, again a standard
heteroscedastic characteristic of power prices. In addition, we
model the nonlinear relation between price and demand with the
correlation coefﬁcient increasing exponentially with respect to
demand. The service costs of the retailer, without forward contracts, are the simple product of spot price and load. The risks of
Fig. 1. Daily and weekly future contracts and monthly forward contracts.
the retailer are the extreme service costs which occur when both
load and spot prices are high. The retailer can reduce its exposure to risks by purchasing forward contracts for later delivery
periods, e.g., in the Nordic Power Exchange Nordpool there are
daily contracts available for up to nine days ahead, weekly contracts for up to six weeks ahead, monthly forwards for up to
six months ahead, as well as quarterly and yearly contracts for
several years ahead (see Fig. 1). As with the other liquid forward markets, e.g., U.K., Germany, the products traded become
increasingly aggregated as the contract extends further into the
future. Typically in Europe, traders will deal mainly in baseload
contracts (i.e., continuous supply) in the longer term, from a
year to three years ahead. Over the medium term, for quarterly
and weekly periods, the demand proﬁle will be coarsely hedged
with a simple mixture of two products, peakload (i.e., continuous power for the whole daytime, e.g., 8 am to 8 pm) and
baseload. Only at the daily, or day-ahead, spot market or power
exchange, would the expected demand be re-proﬁled from the
two baseload and peakload products into hourly positions. This
progression of granularity is necessary in order to concentrate
the liquidity in trading. Thus, in those markets with active, liquid
forward trading, spot trading may actually account for less than
a few percent of the total volume, as it would be mainly associated with this re-proﬁling of peak and base contracts into
hourly (or half-hourly in the U.K.) physical commitments. Risk
management therefore evolves in several horizons: a longer term
portfolio of quarterly and annual contracts, a midterm portfolio
of weekly and monthly products, and short-term day-ahead to
daily operations trading. In this paper, we are concerned with
the midterm horizon, which tends to be the most active, and of
course this work only applies to those markets with sufﬁcient
liquidity in forward contracting.
The retailer can adjust the contract portfolio within the
horizon in each consecutive time period by selling some of
the existing contracts or by purchasing additional contracts.
Forward contracts are likely to involve risk premiums, i.e., the
forward price may differ from the expected spot price due to
the different risk aversions between supply and demand participants in the market or their relative market power [51]. In our
analysis we treat “forward” and “futures” contracts as similar
(and use the terms interchangeably), even though as products
they can differ in their implications on whether the contracts
will ultimately lead to physical delivery or a purely ﬁnancial
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KETTUNEN et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF ELECTRICITY RETAILER’s CONTRACT PORTFOLIO SUBJECT TO RISK PREFERENCES
settlement at expiry. Since, we are assuming a midterm horizon
in a market sufﬁciently liquid to allow participants to trade out
of physical positions, these become effectively identical in our
analysis.
The retailer’s optimal contract portfolio is computed using
modules for scenario generation and contract portfolio optimization. The scenario generation module takes 1) forward
prices, 2) expected loads, 3) conditional standard deviations and
mean reversions of spot price and load, 4) forward premiums,
and 5) correlation parameters as exogenous input. The forward
prices are observed directly from the market while the other
parameters can be estimated using historical time series data.
Based on the estimated parameters, the discrete time scenario
tree accounting for the unique characteristics of the stochastic
processes of the spot price and demand are generated. The
second module uses the generated scenario tree and optimizes
the contract portfolio while accounting for the time-dependent
risk constraints. This provides optimal purchasing and selling
decisions for contracts at the speciﬁc time points as well as
the contingency plan. Overall, it is assumed that the retailer’s
objective is to minimize the expected cost of the contract
portfolio while meeting its risk constraints.
Note that the existence of long-term bilateral electricity
supply contracts, which the retailer can use to secure a
pre-speciﬁed amount of electricity at a pre-speciﬁed price, or
own-generation, do not affect this model. The reason is that
their inclusion does not remove the risk management need
because a retailer still needs to adjust the remaining portion of
the electricity load via spot market and use contracts to hedge
these risks [48]. Also, because the problem is formulated from
the cost minimization perspective, there is no need to model
the retailer’s revenues that are received from the end-users.
III. MODEL SPECIFICATION
A. Scenario Tree
We deﬁne the following parameters:
instantaneous electricity spot price and load,
i.e., price and load per time unit when the time
interval is inﬁnitesimally small;
mean reversion factors of price and load;
instantaneous means to which price and load
revert;
instantaneous standard deviations of price and
load;
instantaneous correlation between price and
load.
The scenario tree is generated for a ﬁnite planning horizon
over
time periods. The uncertainties pertain to the
instantaneous electricity spot price
and load
which follow
mean-reverting Ornstein–Uhlenbeck stochastic process
(1)
where
and
are
correlated
Wiener
processes
such
that
. These processes are modeled with
the extension of the HSS scenario tree [30] which generates
a recombining discrete time scenario tree of two correlated
binomial trees. Binomial trees are used because the computational burden is thus lower than if trees had greater number of
branches. The number of scenarios grows exponentially with
respect to the number of time periods and child nodes, i.e., by
using two binomial trees, the number of scenarios in period
is
. Binomial trees are commonly used in ﬁnance to represent
the path-dependent evolution of an uncertainty [52], [53].
The advantages of the extension of the HSS scenario generation method are, among others, that it 1) matches initially the
market observed future prices and 2) provides an arbitrage-free
pricing environment. The method can be used to approximate a
correlated multivariate-lognormal process exhibiting mean-reversion and volatility clustering. Thus, it can capture essential
characteristics of the electricity price and load processes if
applied at the daily, weekly, or monthly intervals in which the
future and forward contracts are also speciﬁed at the Nordpool.
The HSS method does not, for instance, incorporate spikes,
which are more pronounced in higher frequency, hourly level
[54].
The steps of building the HSS scenario tree for correlated
price and load consist of the computation of 1) nodal values for
price and load, 2) scenario probabilities, and 3) future prices.
1) Nodal Values: To compute nodal values, we deﬁne movements in the scenario tree as follows. Let
be the base scenario
in period
and
be the set of all scenarios in period ;
there are
such scenarios because we have two uncertainties
that are modeled as binomial trees. A scenario
is represented
as a
-matrix whose elements consist of binary variables
for load movements and
for price movements in period ,
The unique immediate predecessor of scenario
is
such that
, and
. All the preceding scenarios of
are denoted
by
(see Fig. 2).
The scenario matrices are interpreted so that
means
that the load in period
is higher compared to the expected load
as seen on
, while
corresponds to a lower load in
period
compared to the expected load as seen on
. Likewise, higher and lower prices compared to the expected price as
seen on
are denoted by
and
We also deﬁne
electricity spot price (EUR/MWh) in period
in
scenario
electricity load (MWh) in period
in scenario
multiplicative increase and decrease in electricity
spot price in period when
and
respectively;
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 2. Scenario tree with two example scenarios highlighted.
multiplicative increase and decrease in electricity
load in period
when
and
respectively;
number of multiplicative increases in the price
during periods
in scenario
, i.e.,
number of multiplicative increases in the load
during periods
in scenario
, i.e.,
expected spot price (EUR/MWh) and expected
electricity load (MWh) in period
as seen at
time 0;
conditional standard deviations of electricity spot
price and load in period ;
market observed futures prices as seen at time
0 for delivery period ;
risk premium (in % of future prices) for
periods
later starting future.
The electricity spot price
and electricity load
in
scenario
are as follows [28]:
(2)
(3)
where
(4)
(5)
The expected spot prices
can be obtained from the
observed futures prices by removing the risk premiums [55];
hence, the model can be matched to observed prices of futures
contracts
(6)
2) Scenario Probabilities: We deﬁne
scenario
probability in period ;
probabilities of the higher price and load in
period
in scenario
compared to the
expected levels as seen on
correlation of electricity price and load in
period
in scenario
correlation parameters;
future contract prices as seen in period
in
scenario
for the contract period
Scenario probabilities
can be computed by using the probabilities of the higher price
and
load
compared to the expected levels as seen on
(7)
Probabilities of the higher price
and load
compared to the expected levels as seen on
can be computed
following [30],
(8)
(9)
The probabilities of lower prices and loads compared to the
expected levels as seen on
are one minus the probabilities of higher prices and loads compared to the expected levels
as seen on
. The increased correlation between load and
price as a function of increasing load (i.e., similar to the increase
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KETTUNEN et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF ELECTRICITY RETAILER’s CONTRACT PORTFOLIO SUBJECT TO RISK PREFERENCES
in the demand elasticity of price) is modeled through an exponential function. The parameters
and
for the following formulation can be estimated from the market or by using marginal
cost supply function:
(10)
Based on the estimated parameters
and
, it is possible to
conﬁrm that the correlation remains between [ 1, 1] in all load
levels that are computed using (3). If this is not the case, then
the violating correlations can be gapped to [ 1, 1], for example.
In other words,
if
, then set
and if
, then set
. If the
violations occur frequently, it is worth investigating alternative
speciﬁcation for the correlation equation.
3) Future Prices: Future prices are computed at each node in
period for the later delivery
. We assume that the contract
period lasts the whole period
, and hence, the future price is
equivalent to the conditional expected spot price multiplied by
the risk premium for that period. Therefore, the future price is
(11)
4) Scenario Tree Generation Steps:
1) Obtain historical time series data regarding spot prices, future prices, and loads.
2) Estimate conditional standard deviations
and
using GARCH(1,1) model, for example.
3) Compute
, and
using (4) and (5).
4) Calculate expected spot prices
using (6), market
observed futures
, and estimated premiums
5) Estimate expected electricity loads
based on historical data or experts’ opinions, for example.
6) Calculate electricity spot prices
and electricity loads
with (2) and (3).
7) Estimate
and
based on historical time series data applying the least squares method to the linearized version of
(10).
8) Calculate probabilities of the higher price and load in scenario
compared to the expected levels as seen on
using (8) and (9) and ﬁnally the scenario probabilities
with (7).
B. Contract Portfolio Optimization
We deﬁne
cash position in period
in
scenario
initial cash position;
short rate at which
cash accrues interest
between periods
amount (MWh) of purchased
and sold
period electricity
at time
in scenario
if
contract is spot, if
future;
net amount (MWh) of
electricity contracts
at time
in scenario
, i.e.,
set of all purchased future
contracts which delivery
period ends in period ;
risk constraint matrix,
pre-speciﬁed risk tolerance
levels measured in
conditional-cash-ﬂow-atrisk;
auxiliary variables,
probability of a non-tail
event,
auxiliary variables in period
in scenario
reference target amount,
which divides the scenarios
into proﬁt and loss scenarios,
The optimization problem is formulated using stochastic optimization [41] subject to cash-ﬂow constraints, trading constraints, and risk management constraints. The stochastic optimization approach is advantageous in our setting because it permits the introduction of risk constraints also in intermediate time
periods. This would be practically impossible with dynamic programming approaches [56] where the intermediate nodes represent the maximum cash position when discounting from the
terminal time period and hence do not account for the cash-ﬂow
impacts of past decisions [57].
1) Cash-Flow Constraints: In period
, the cash position
in base scenario
is
(12)
where
is the initial cash position and
is the cost of
acquiring electricity for satisfying the load in the base scenario.
In period
, the cash position in scenario
consist of three parts: 1) cash position from the base scenario
and interest on it,
[58]; 2) cost of spot contracts purchased in
; and 3) changes in the
values of the future contracts purchased in the base scenario
, i.e., futures contracts are
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
marked-to-market in every period. These components can be
generalized to periods
as follows:1
(13)
2) Trading Constraints: We assume that the electricity
retailer trades forward contracts primarily for hedging purposes
and not for speculating. Hence, we do not permit the short
selling of futures contracts (i.e., borrowing future contracts
from a broker and selling it with the obligation to buy it back to
the broker later), but permit the selling of previously purchased
futures. These assumptions correspond to the following trading
constraints
(14)
3) Risk Management Constraints: Extreme risks can be
taken into consideration by using VAR or CVAR risk measures
[37], [59]. But although VAR is the de facto standard in the
ﬁnancial industry [31], it is problematic in that it does not fulﬁl
the subadditivity condition [32]–[36] of the following four
requirements on coherent risk measure, stated for risk measure
where
and
are random returns [60].
1) Translation invariance
2) Subadditivity
3) Positive homogeneity
4) Positivity
We apply CVAR which is a coherent risk measure and can be
solved using linear (convex) optimization formulation of [37].
This formulation can be used for a cash-ﬂow version, conditional-cash-ﬂow-at-risk (CCFAR), with minor modiﬁcations as
presented. Extreme risks can be curtailed throughout the planning horizon by introducing concurrent CCFAR risk constraints
at several conﬁdence levels as follows,
(15)
1As we have a cost minimization problem, the retailer’s revenues that are received from the end-users are not included. If the model were formulated for
maximizing proﬁts, an analogous approach could be used in which revenues,
that are typically based on a pre-agreed price per consumed MWh, could be included by replacing P (s ) with P (s ) from which is subtracted the pre-agreed
constant price.
We included in the above formulation reference target
amounts
. They allow to specify different reference, or
benchmark, cash positions for each time periods shifting the
CCFAR levels accordingly to reﬂect that the total cumulative
benchmark costs increase in time.
4) Objective Function and Complete Maximization Problem:
As in stochastic programming [41], we maximize the expected
cash position (i.e., minimize expected costs) in the terminal time
period
(16)
subject to constraints (12)–(15).
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS FROM EMPIRICAL DATA
The experiments illustrate the key characteristics of stochastic optimization and its sensitivities to input parameters
and concurrent risk constraints. The experiments were analyzed
from the point of view of two different retailers of the electricity
market: 1) a risk neutral retailer who uses few forward contracts
and seeks to minimize the expected cost of its portfolio and 2)
a risk averse retailer who uses substantial forward contracting
and seeks to minimize its extreme risks measured in CCFAR.
The experiments also test the following hypotheses.
• H1: An increase (decrease) in premiums increases (decreases) the cost of hedged portfolio. An increase in the
premiums results in higher future prices which in turn increases the expected cost of the hedged portfolio, the more
the futures are used.
• H2: An increase (decrease) in correlation increases (decreases) risk. High correlation means that load and spot
are more likely to move together which means that there
are more extreme events and risk.
• H3: An increase (decrease) in mean reversion decreases
(increases) risk. Stronger mean reversion is expected to
keep the values closer to their mean resulting in less extreme scenarios and less risk.
• H4: An increase (decrease) in the conditional standard deviation of spot price or load increases (decreases) risk.
The optimization problems were solved with the Dash Optimization software Xpress, run on a PC with a 700-MHz Pentium III processor, 256 MB of RAM, and Windows XP operating system. The running time of the optimization models was
about 5 s.
A. Data
We consider the midterm horizon problem, with weekly and
monthly level contracts, as these are the most actively traded
[61], and may therefore represent a crucial stage in contract
portfolio risk management process. This is without loss of
generality, however, since an analogous approach can be used
over different contract portfolio optimization horizons. We
consider a six-week time horizon, which includes all forward
contracts in the market with one-week periods. This resulted
in a tractable model, which did not call for the use of scenario
reduction methods [16], [22]. At the same time, this horizon
was long enough for testing the above hypotheses and for
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KETTUNEN et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF ELECTRICITY RETAILER’s CONTRACT PORTFOLIO SUBJECT TO RISK PREFERENCES
exploring the properties of the model and its sensitivities to
input parameters. The weekly level of aggregation allowed us
to ignore spot market spikes and issues of daily seasonality.
Weekly market data on six weeks futures were obtained on
24.3.2006 from the Nordic power exchange Nordpool. The premiums of the futures were estimated for this six-week period
based on Nordpool’s future and spot prices from the past seven
years (weeks 13–18 in 1999–2005). The estimation of future
premiums with a least squares approach resulted in the linear
equation
that estimates the premiums
for six one-week long futures
,2,3,4,5,6, each of which
started from where the previous future ended as seen on March
24, for a similar method of estimating premiums (see, e.g., [55]).
Our estimated coefﬁcient of t is twice the magnitude of [55]. It is
also positive as in their study suggesting that, within the estimation period, the premium increases the further ahead the starting
date of the future contract is. This can be due to an increase in
the risk aversion of power generators although the size of our
data set does not warrant general conclusions. In an extensive
study focusing on forward contracts, [62] shows that the premium is seasonal and can be even negative when the standard
deviation of the electricity load is low.
We considered the future
as the weekly spot price
after accounting for the risk premium. The conditional weekly
standard deviations for spot prices were estimated from the
same seven-year data set. This was done by 1) taking a 26-week
moving average of the data and 2) modeling the standard
deviation of the difference of the moving average and the actual
data with GARCH(1,1)
so
that the long-term trend and seasonal effects were ﬁltered out.
The estimated parameters were
, and
For the electricity load, we obtained the weekly loads in Finland for the period 1990–2005 from [63], of which we used
1% (comparable to the load in an average small town). The expected weekly electricity loads were estimated by taking an average load change in the past (weeks 13–18 in 1990–2005) and
applying these expected changes to forecast expected loads in
weeks 13–18 in 2006. The conditional weekly standard deviations for the loads were estimated from the same data set applying a GARCH(1,1) model
for ﬁltered data (similar to the estimation of the conditional
spot price standard deviations). The estimated parameters were
, and
The estimation of load and spot price correlation parameters
was based on weekly data for the six months prior to 24.3.2006,
which reﬂected the capacity of electricity generation at the time
the model was run (unlike the full set of data from seven years).
The estimation was conducted by dividing the data into four
segments based on load and evaluating the correlations in the
segments, whereafter the least squares method was applied to
the linearized version of (10). This resulted in
and
. The mean reversion parameters were obtained by ﬁtting with least squares method linear equations for the mean reversion processes of the spot price and load during weeks 13–18
in years 1999–2005. The means to which the spot and the load
values revert are the expected spots and the expected loads for
the corresponding week as seen in the beginning of week 13.
TABLE I
DATA OF EXPERIMENTS (WEEKLY FUTURE PRICES AS SEEN ON 24.3.2006
IN EUR/MW CONTRACT AND EXPECTED LOADS IN GWh)
Mean reversion for spot price c
= 0:2 and load c
= 0:4, correlation
parameters N = 0:08 and  = 0:1 (which implied that the effective range
of the correlation coefﬁcient was between 30% and 70%), the yearly interest
rate was 2%, and trade fee was 0.03 EUR/MWh.
The estimated mean reversion parameters for the spot and the
load were 0.2 and 0.4, respectively. The data of the experiments
are summarized in Table I.
Some simpliﬁcations and adjustments were made in the experiments. In the scenario tree generation, probabilities of the
higher and lower prices and loads compared to the expected
levels were rounded to obtain values between zero and one, as
suggested by [28]; this is because the HSS model can, at times,
result in probabilities that are either negative or greater than
one if correlation between the modeled variables is very strong
[28].2 This rounding of probabilities between zero and one can
mean that the tree does not match the values of the observed
futures perfectly. To avoid this, the nodal values were re-scaled
after the tree was created and a perfect match achieved (for similar approach, see [30]). Reference [30] also demonstrates that
re-scaling can be done as “the computation of the probabilities
is independent of the means of the process” and thus the structure of the stochastic process remains correct. Fig. 3 shows the
scenarios in time periods
and
, after re-scaling. In the
terminal period,
, there are
scenarios and the
ranges of values that load and price can obtain, given
are [13.39, 19.42] and [11.57, 117.75], respectively.
Taxation issues were ignored, and it was assumed that the
purchased contracts do not inﬂuence contract prices. We also assumed that future contracts can be purchased in any size of units,
although in reality, the minimum contract volume is 1 MW.
B. Results
The experiments were conducted to compare the meanCCFAR efﬁciency of 1) our proposed stochastic optimization,
2) periodic optimization, and 3) a ﬁxed allocation strategy
(in which futures were purchased according to the following
ﬁxed percentages of the load 80%, 70%, 60%, 50%, and 40%
for the one, two, three, four, and ﬁve weeks dated futures,
respectively). Periodic optimization approach differs from the
stochastic optimization approach by determining a single optimal portfolio for each period instead of computing the optimal
2We observed that this phenomenon occurred also if the mean reversion parameters or conditional standard deviations were high.
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 3. Generated scenarios for periods t = 0 and t = 1.
Fig. 4. Comparison of stochastic optimization, periodic optimization, and ﬁxed
allocation (ﬁgures in million EUR).
portfolio for each scenario in each period. Periodic optimization is conducted over the same scenario tree using (12)–(16)
but replacing
, and
with period
speciﬁc decisions
, and
, respectively.
Periodic optimization approach is used, for example in Monte
Carlo simulations, when the optimization is done over each
simulation trial independently, and the decisions are averaged
out for each period in the end.
Fig. 4 shows the mean-efﬁcient frontiers with respect to the
six-week 95% CCFAR, in which losses relate to an initial budget
of 5.2 million EUR. The stochastic optimization is the most ef-
ﬁcient one with respect to the expected cost and CCFAR. For
example, a comparison of stochastic optimization with ﬁxed allocation indicates that the same risk level (as measured by 95%
CCFAR) can be attained at about 5.6% lower cost in relation to
the initial budget. The gap between the methods can be expected
to increase if the risks increase due to changes in correlation,
standard deviations, or mean reversions.
From the point of view of the risk averse retailer, which corresponds to the leftmost end of the curve, the stochastic optimization approach provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts in reduction of
expected cost as contract portfolio is efﬁciently managed. For
the risk neutral retailer, which corresponds to the rightmost end
of the curve, the beneﬁts of the stochastic optimization method
are less signiﬁcant because only a few futures are purchased.
When the hypotheses H1–H4 were tested with respect
to changes in the input parameters, these hypothesis were
validated (see Fig. 5). Speciﬁcally, the impact of increased
premiums can be seen in Fig. 5(a). For the risk neutral retailer
(the rightmost end of the curves), the change in premiums does
not have impact on the expected cost. In contrast, for the risk
averse retailer (the leftmost end of the curves), the increased
premiums result in signiﬁcantly higher expected cost. In fact,
the impact on expected cost is stronger the more hedging is
conducted.
The change in the risk (H2, H3, and H4) can be observed
similarly by comparing the horizontal changes of the risk neutral retailer, for example. Fig. 5(e) and (f) shows that for the
price-related input parameters, the change in risk strongly depends whether the retailer is risk averse or risk neutral. This
can be seen by comparing the horizontal differences between
the curves for risk averse and risk neutral retailer. As can be
seen, the risk averse retailer is almost immune to variability in
price-related input parameters while the risk can vary signiﬁ-
cantly for risk neutral retailer. Also it can be observed that uncertainty in load-related input parameters causes roughly equal
amount of risk for both risk averse and risk neutral retailers
[see Fig. 5(c) and (d)]. This effect can be explained by noting
that their future contracts provide a perfect hedge against price
changes but cannot capture volume risks. Thus, both retailers
need to pay attention to the load-related uncertainties and possibly use swing options to protect against the volume risks.
However, the risk neutral retailer also has to be concerned about
the price-related risks which result in greater variability in risk
than load-related uncertainties.
Further experiments were also run with the correlation being
zero [see Fig. 5(b)] to analyze how much risk this assumption
underestimates compared to the model with positive exponential correlation. Similar tests were also run for the correlation
parameter
and corresponding results were obtained. The difference was signiﬁcant for the risk neutral retailer as risk was underestimated by approximately 23%, in absolute terms about 0.3
million EUR, while the effect was less for risk averse retailer.
Thus, including correlation into the analysis was important.
The robustness of the optimum strategies were also evaluated
by observing how close the optimal contract portfolio strategy
of the original problem, i.e., solution for a given risk aversion, were to the efﬁcient frontiers when the input parameters
were changed one at a time. The results suggested that the
optimal strategies of the original problem were not sensitive
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KETTUNEN et al.: OPTIMIZATION OF ELECTRICITY RETAILER’s CONTRACT PORTFOLIO SUBJECT TO RISK PREFERENCES
Fig. 5. Sensitivity of mean-CCFAR efﬁcient frontier with respect to changes in (a) , (b) N, (c) c , (d)  , (e) c , and (f)  .
Note, the change in premiums corresponded to the change in the gradient and in conditional standard deviations to a parallel shift.
to the changes in the input parameters. These are illustrated
also in Fig. 5. Here the point marked with “O” is the optimal
contract portfolio strategy of the original problem, when six
week CCFAR constraint was set to 0.4 million EUR, and is
thus on the mean-CCFAR efﬁcient frontier. The points marked
with “X” are computed applying the original contract portfolio
strategy when the input parameter was 50%3 higher and lower,
respectively, than originally.
3For N, we used 20% as an increase of 50% would have resulted correlation
values that were greater than 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: CHANGSHA UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on December 20,2025 at 04:51:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 6. Mean efﬁcient surface with respect to four weeks and six weeks 95%
CCFAR (ﬁgures in million EUR).
Finally, we conducted experiments to analyze the effects of
introducing a risk constraint matrix (with two risk constraints)
compared to a single risk constraint. For this purpose, we plot
the mean-CCFAR efﬁcient surface with respect to four and six
weeks 95% CCFAR, which losses relate to an budget of 3.5
and 5.2 million EUR, respectively (see Fig. 6). The risk neutral
retailer is located in this graph close to the corner marked as
at which point the cost of the portfolio is minimized. The risk
averse retailer is close to the extreme corners in the opposite end,
for example at point marked as
, depending on the required
level of risks at six and four weeks.
In Fig. 6, we also highlight a point A which represents a situation when the expected procurement costs are minimized and
a risk constraint only on the six weeks 95% CCFAR is applied
at the level of 0.6 million EUR. At this point, the risk at the
intermediate four weeks 95% CCFAR is not curtailed. However, by setting an additional constraint for the four weeks 95%
CCFAR at the level of 0.4 million EUR, it is possible to reduce
the four weeks risk by approximately 50% (in absolute terms
roughly 0.5 million EUR) while the increase in cost is insignificant being only by 0.1% (in absolute terms only 0.005 million
EUR). Consequently, setting constraints concurrently at several
time periods can reduce signiﬁcantly the intermediate period
risks which can be important, for example due to regulatory reasons or if the company is close to ﬁnancial distress.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Our results suggest that the stochastic optimization approach
can be more efﬁcient for risk management by an electricity retailer than periodic optimization or ﬁxed allocation approaches.
This result can be attributed to the fact stochastic optimization
uses the path dependency of information along individual scenario paths to optimize hedging in each period. This result is
also analogous to the ﬁndings of [6] which compares the effectiveness of a production and hedging portfolio using dynamic
and static models for electricity production.
One of the key insights from the numerical studies is that it is
important to incorporate the correlation between spot price and
load into the model as correlation increases the probability of
the extreme outcomes and hence risks. The results of the experiments also suggest that a risk neutral retailer would be more
concerned about the price-related uncertainties, which result
in greater variability in risk, than load related uncertainties. A
risk averse retailer, on the other hand, should estimate carefully
the risk premiums which strongly affect the expected cost and
should also use derivatives, such as swing contracts, to hedge for
load-related uncertainties. Overall the model is relatively robust
in that the solutions remain close to the efﬁcient frontier even if
there are minor variations in the input parameters.
Our approach also includes CCFAR constraints across several
time periods rather than focusing only upon the terminal period.
This is important as it allows retailers to keep the cash position in
intermediate periods within risk limits for satisfying compliance
regulation requirements or above a desired risk level if the company is ﬁnancially constrained. This risk management across intermediate periods is also important in the methodology, as retailers will continue to operate after the terminal period, and in
practice, risk management needs to feed forward continuously.
Consequently, it is important in practice to incorporate the risks
during the intermediate time periods and to re-run the model for
all time periods, rolling forward, when updated information becomes available. The same rationale applies to risk management
at different conﬁdence levels, as well.
This research has made contributions to the general direction of methodology. It is possible to integrate additional details,
for instance regarding the special market characteristics of the
price formation process and load prediction errors, to consider
different time speciﬁcations, as well as cross-hedging with related markets, most of which present substantial but essentially
computational extensions. But, more generally, this research has
demonstrated that more accurate results can be achieved in the
electricity retailing business by incorporating path-dependencies in the generated scenarios and using multistage evaluation
to optimize hedging at intermediate stages. We found that stochastic optimization, combined with a risk constraint matrix
framework and allied to the HSS scenario building process, provided a viable methodology for this class of problems. Furthermore, it provides insights into the relative sensitivity of risk
management parameters to different kinds of market participants in this context.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S. Makkonen for fruitful discussions and K. Berg, A. Toppila, and E. Vilkkumaa for comments on the previous versions.