1. Introduction
The increasing penetration of renewable energy sources in today’s
power systems makes electricity generation more volatile and the resulting electricity prices harder to predict than ever before [1–4]. On
the other hand, advances in electricity price forecasting (EPF) constantly
provide new tools with the ultimate objective of narrowing the gap
between predictions and actual prices. The progress in this field, however, is not steady and easy to follow. In particular, as concluded by
all major review publications, comparisons between EPF methods are
very difficult since studies use different datasets, different software
implementations, and different error measures; the lack of statistical
rigor complicates these analyses even further [5–8]. In particular:
• There are several studies comparing machine learning (ML) and
statistical methods but the conclusions of these studies are contradictory. Typically, studies considering advanced statistical techniques only compare them with simple ML methods [9–11] and
show that statistical methods are obviously better. Conversely,
studies proposing new ML methods only compare them with
simple statistical methods [12–16] and show that ML models are
more accurate.
• In many of the existing studies [17–23] the testing periods are too
short to yield conclusive results. In some cases, the test datasets
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: j.lagogarcia@tudelft.nl (J. Lago).
are limited to one-week periods [22,24–30]; this ignores the
problem of special days, e.g. holidays, and is not representative
for the performance of the proposed algorithms across a whole
year. As argued in [5], to have meaningful conclusions, the test
dataset should span at least a year.
• Some of the existing papers do not provide enough details to
reproduce the research. The three most common issues are:
(i) not specifying the exact split between the training and test
dataset [31–37], (ii) not indicating the inputs used for the prediction model [35,36,38–40], and (iii) not specifying the dataset employed [21,33,41,42]. This obviously prevents other researchers
from validating the research results.
These three problems have aggravated over the last years with
the increase in popularity of deep learning (DL). While new published
papers on DL for EPF appear almost every month, and most claim to
develop models that obtain state-of-the-art accuracy, the comparisons
performed in those papers are very limited. Particularly, the new DL
methods are usually compared with simpler ML methods [28,30,43–
47]. This is obviously problematic as such comparisons are not fair.
Moreover, as the proposed methods are not compared with other DL
algorithms, new DL methods are continuously being proposed but it is
unclear how the different models perform relative to each other.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116983
Received 29 December 2020; Received in revised form 15 April 2021; Accepted 18 April 2021

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Similar problems arise in the context of hybrid methods. In recent
years, very complex hybrid methods have been proposed. Typically,
these hybrid models are based on combining a decomposition technique, a feature selection method, an ML regression model, and sometimes a meta-heuristic algorithm for optimization purposes. As with
DL algorithms, these studies usually avoid comparisons with wellestablished methods [21,25,34,42,48–50] or resort to comparisons using outdated methodologies [22,24,26,37,41,51,52]. In addition, while
a specific genetic algorithm or decomposition technique is considered,
most of the studies do not analyze the effect of selecting a variant of
these techniques [21,24,50–52]. Thus, the relative importance of each
of the different components of the hybrid methods it is not even clear.
1.1. Motivation and contributions
The above mentioned problems call for three actions. Firstly, implementing in a popular programming environment (e.g. python) and
making available a set of simple but powerful open-source forecasting
methods, which can potentially obtain state-of-the-art performance, and
that researchers can easily use to evaluate any new forecasting model.
Secondly, collecting and making freely available to the EPF community a set of representative benchmark datasets that researchers can use
to evaluate and compare their methods using long testing periods. Although, some datasets are available for download without restrictions,
e.g. as supplements to published articles [53] or sample transaction
data [54], they are typically limited in scope (one market, a 2–3 year
timespan or price series only). Hence, conclusions from such datasets
are limited, results can hardly be extrapolated to other markets, and
the relevance of the studies using such data are not entirely clear.
Thirdly, putting forward a set of best practices so that the conclusions
of EPF studies become more meaningful and fair comparisons can be
made.
In this paper, we try to tackle the above via three distinct contributions:
1. We analyze the existing literature and select what could arguably be considered as state-of-the-art among statistical and
machine learning methods: the Lasso Estimated AutoRegressive
(LEAR) model1 [55] and the Deep Neural Network (DNN) [57], a
relatively simple and automated DL method that optimizes hyperparameters and features using Bayesian optimization. Then,
we make our models available to other researchers as part
of an open-source python library (https://github.com/jeslago/
epftoolbox) specially designed to provide a common research
framework for EPF research [58]. Besides the models, we also
provide extensive documentation [59] for the library.
2. We propose a set of five open-access benchmark datasets spanning six years each, that represent a range of well-established
day-ahead, auction type power markets from around the globe.
The datasets contain day-ahead electricity prices at an hourly
resolution and two relevant exogenous variables each. They can
be accessed from the mentioned python library [58]. Together
with the datasets, the library also includes the forecasts of
the open-access methods across the five benchmark datasets so
that researchers can quickly make further comparisons without
having to re-train or re-estimate the models.
3. We provide a set of best practice guidelines to conduct research
in EPF so that new studies are more sound, reproducible, and
the obtained conclusions are stronger. In addition, we include
some of the guidelines, e.g. adequate evaluation metrics or statistical tests, in the mentioned python library [58] to provide
a common research framework for EPF research.
1 Originally introduced in [55] under the name LassoX and based on the
fARX model, a parameter-rich autoregressive specification with exogenous
variables. The name refers to the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator
(LASSO) [56] used to jointly select features and estimate their parameters.
Fig. 1. Illustration of the day-ahead auction market, where wholesale sellers and buyers
submit their bids before gate closure on day 𝑑−1 for the delivery of electricity during
day 𝑑; the 24 hourly prices for day 𝑑are set simultaneously, typically around midday.
1.2. Paper structure
The remainder of the paper is organized a follows. Section 2 performs a literature review of the current state of EPF. Sections 3 and 4
respectively present the open-access benchmark datasets and the opensource benchmark models. Section 5 describes the set of guidelines and
best practices when performing research in EPF. Section 6 discusses
the forecasting results for all five datasets. Finally, Section 7 provides
a summary and a checklist of the requirements for meaningful EPF
research.
2. Literature review
The field of EPF aims at predicting the spot and forward prices in
wholesale markets, either in a point or probabilistic setting. However,
given the diversity of trading regulations available across the globe,
EPF always has to be tailored to the specific market. For instance,
the workhorse of European short-term power trading is the day-ahead
market with its once-per-day uniform-price auction, see Fig. 1. On the
other hand, the Australian National Electricity Market operates as a
real-time power pool, where a dispatch price is determined every five
minutes and six dispatch prices are averaged every half hour as pool
prices [60], while electricity forward markets share many aspects with
those of other energy commodities (oil, gas, coal), and quite often are
only financially settled [61].
As the field of EPF is very diverse, a complete literature review
is out of the scope of this paper. Instead, this section is intended to
provide an overview of the three families of methods, i.e. statistical,
ML, and hybrid methods, proposed for point forecasting in day-ahead
markets since 2014, i.e. since the last comprehensive literature review
of Weron [5]. The more recent reviews either focused on short-term [6]
and medium-/long-term [7] probabilistic EPF, were not that comprehensive in scope [62,63], or concerned electricity derivatives [61].
Furthermore, our survey puts a special emphasis on DL and hybrid
methods as this is the area of EPF characterized by the most rapid
development and, at the same time, troubled by non-rigorous empirical
studies which motivated us to write this paper in the first place.
2.1. Statistical methods
Most models in this class rely on linear regression and represent the
dependent (or output) variable, i.e. the price 𝑝𝑑,ℎfor day 𝑑and hour
ℎ, by a linear combination of independent (or predictor, explanatory)
variables, also called regressors, inputs, or features:
𝑝𝑑,ℎ= 𝜽ℎ𝐗𝑑,ℎ+ 𝜀𝑑,ℎ,
(1)
where 𝜽ℎ= [𝜃ℎ,0, 𝜃ℎ,1, … , 𝜃ℎ,𝑛] is a row vector of coefficients specific
to hour ℎ, 𝐗𝑑,ℎ= [1, 𝑋1
𝑑,ℎ, … , 𝑋𝑛
𝑑,ℎ]⊤is a column vector of inputs and
𝜀𝑑,ℎis an error term; the intercept 𝜃ℎ,0 can be set to zero if the data is

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
demeaned beforehand. Note that here we are using a notation common
in day-ahead forecasting, which emphasizes the vector structure of
these price series, see Fig. 1. Alternatively we could use single indexing:
𝑝𝑡with 𝑡= 24𝑑+ ℎ. Although the multivariate modeling framework
has been shown to be marginally more accurate than the univariate
counterpart, both approaches have their pros and cons [64,65].
In the last few years, there have been several key contributions in
the field of statistical methods for EPF. Arguably, the most relevant of
them has been the appearance of linear regression models with a large
number of input features that utilize regularization techniques [56,66].
Classically, the regression model in (1) is estimated using ordinary least
squares (OLS) by minimizing the residual sum of squares (RSS), i.e.
squared differences between the predicted and actual values. However,
if the number of regressors is large, using the least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (LASSO) [56] or its generalization the elastic net [66]
as implicit feature selection methods have been shown to improve the
forecasting results [55,57,64,67–69], also in intraday [70,71] and probabilistic [72,73] EPF. In particular, by jointly minimizing the RSS and
a penalty factor of the model parameters (see Section 4.2 for details),
these two implicit regularization techniques set some of the parameters
to zero and thus effectively eliminate redundant regressors. As shown in
the cited studies, these parameter-rich2 regularized regression models
exhibit superior performance. It is important to note that such an
approach, called here Lasso Estimated AutoRegressive (LEAR), is in fact
hybrid since LASSO (and electric nets) are considered ML techniques
by some authors. However, we classify it as statistical because the
underlying model is autoregressive (AR).
Aside from proposing parameter-rich models and advanced estimators, researchers have also improved the field by considering a variety
of additional preprocessing techniques. Most notably, models using socalled variance stabilizing transformations [9,64,74,75] and long-term
seasonal components [76–79] have been proposed and shown to result
in statistically significant improvements. However, the applicability of
these two techniques varies greatly: due to very common occurrence
of price spikes, variance stabilizing transformations have become a
standard and replaced the commonly used logarithmic transformation
(no longer applicable due to zeros and negative values3) to normalize
electricity prices. By contrast, the applicability of long-term seasonal
components has been more limited and it is unknown whether their
beneficial effect is limited to relatively parsimonious regression models
or also holds for parameter-rich models.
A third innovation in the field is an ensemble (i.e. a method that
combines individual forecasting models) that combines multiple forecasts of the same model calibrated on different windows. In this context, two different studies [80,81] showed that the best results are
obtained with a combination of a few short (spanning 1–4 months)
and a few long calibration windows (of approximately two years). Said
ensembles were able to significantly outperform predictions obtained
for the best ex-post selected calibration window [80–82]. But again, it
has not been shown to date whether this effect is limited to relatively
parsimonious regression models or also holds for LEAR models.
Interestingly, as [83] argue in an econometric context, in the presence of structural breaks it may be advisable to combine forecasts
obtained for calibration windows of different lengths. Longer windows allow for a better fit, while shorter faster adapt to changes.
Hence, if a structural break appears, like the COVID-19 pandemic,
using models calibrated to shorter windows may better capture changes
in the price dynamics. A different, but a potentially also appealing
approach has been recently suggested in [84,85]. The authors assume
that fundamental and price time series exhibit recurrent regimes with
similar dynamics and employ cluster analysis – 𝑘-means [84] or 𝑘-
nearest neighbors [85] – to identify such periods in the past. Then
2 We define a parameter-rich linear model as a model with multiple
regressors (dozens, hundreds).
3 The logarithm of 0 or of a negative value is undefined.
they calibrate models only on data segments which resemble current
conditions. As such, they are able to eliminate subperiods that include
structural breaks from the calibration sample.
Finally, note that in contrast to financial econometrics, where heteroskedasticity is a basic building block of many state-of-the-art approaches [86], models with generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic (GARCH) residuals have been tried for EPF without much
success, for a review and discussion see [5]. For instance, [57] compare
27 different models, among them an ARIMA–GARCH model, and find
that it performs comparable to a much simpler AR model and ca. 1.5
times worse than the DNN model defined in Section 4.3. As [87] argue,
GARCH effects diminish when fundamental and behavioral drivers of
the electricity price volatility are taken into account and allowing for
the time-varying responses of prices to fundamentals can yield more
precise volatility estimates than an explicit GARCH specification.
2.2. Deep learning
In the last five years, a total of 28 deep learning papers in the
context of EPF have been published.4 Moreover, this number has been
steadily increasing: while in 2017 there was only one paper, in 2018
there were 11, and in 2019 there were 16. Despite this trend, most of
the published studies are very limited: the comparisons are too simplistic, e.g. avoid state-of-the-art statistical methods, and their results
cannot be generalized.
The first published DL paper [12] proposes a deep learning network
using stacked denoising autoencoders. The paper, despite being the
first, provides a better evaluation than most studies: the new method
is compared not only against machine learning techniques but also
against two statistical methods. Yet, the evaluation is limited as it only
considers three months of test data and simple benchmark models.
In the second published DL article [57], a DNN for modeling market
integration is proposed. While the method is evaluated over a year
of data, the proposed model is not compared against other machine
learning or statistical methods.
In the third published paper [57], four DL models (a DNNs, two recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and a convolutional network (CNN)) are
proposed. This study is, to the best of our knowledge, the most complete
study up to date. In particular, the proposed DL models are compared
using a whole year of data against a benchmark of 23 different models,
including 7 machine learning models, 15 statistical methods, and a
commercial software. Moreover, among the statistical methods, the
comparison includes the fARX-Lasso and fARX-EN, i.e. the state-of-theart statistical methods. While the study shows the superiority of the DL
algorithms, very strong conclusions are not possible as the study only
considers a single market.
The studies that followed in 2018 focused on one of three topics: (1)
evaluating the performance of different deep recurrent networks [13,
23,37,88]; (2) proposing new hybrid methods based on CNNs and
LSTMs [14,44,89,90]; or (3) employing regular DNN models [23].
Independently of the focus, they were all more limited than the first
and the third studies [12,57] as they failed to compare the new DL
4 This data is primarily based on a Scopus search in the title, abstract, and keywords: TITLE-ABS-KEY((((‘‘forecasting electricity’’) OR (‘‘predicting electricity’’)) AND ((‘‘electricity spot’’) OR (‘‘electricity day-ahead’’) OR (‘‘electricity price’’))) OR (((‘‘price forecasting’’) OR (‘‘price
prediction’’) OR (‘‘forecasting price’’) OR (‘‘predicting price’’) OR (‘‘forecasting spikes’’) OR (‘‘forecasting VAR’’)) AND ((‘‘electricity spot price’’) OR (‘‘electricity price’’) OR (‘‘electricity market’’) OR (‘‘dayahead market’’) OR (‘‘power market’’))) AND (‘‘deep’’) AND
(‘‘learning’’)). We have also run a second, more general query replacing (‘‘deep’’) AND (‘‘learning’’) by (‘‘neural’’) AND (‘‘network’’), however, only
a few additional papers have been identified.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
models with state-of-the-art statistical methods and/or to employ long
enough datasets to derive strong conclusions.
In detail, [13] studies the use of RNNs for forecasting electricity
prices but the comparison is done in a single market and against
simple statistical methods: a seasonal auto regressive integrated moving
average (ARIMA) model, a Markov regime-switching model, and a self
exciting threshold model. Moreover, while the comparison includes
other DL methods, it avoids comparison with simpler ML techniques.
Ref. [44] proposes a hybrid DL method composed of a CNN and a
long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network (a type of recurrent
network) for forecasting balancing prices. However, the new model is
only compared against simple ML benchmarks and the evaluation is
done using different periods comprising three months for training and
1 month for testing. Similarly, [14] proposes another hybrid model
combining a CNN and an LSTM, but the model is only compared
against two simple statistical methods: an auto regressive moving average
(ARMA) and a GARCH model.
In [23] a regular DNN model is proposed but the model is only
evaluated on a test dataset comprising a single day and compared
against a simple multilayer perceptron (MLP). In [29], the use of an
LSTM model for EPF is evaluated, but the method is only compared
with three neural networks and a simple statistical method, and the
evaluation is done using only 4 weeks of data. Likewise, [88] proposes
a model based on an LSTM but a comparison against other methods
is not performed and the test dataset only comprises 2 weeks of data.
In [37], another LSTM model is proposed but, as in other studies, the
test dataset comprises a few months of data and the method is only
compared against a simple decision tree and a support vector regressor;
moreover, the exact split between the training and test dataset is not
specified and it is unclear what is exactly the performance of the model.
An exception to these studies is [91] which proposes a series of DL
models and compares them for a year of data against several advanced
statistical methods such as LASSO and a simpler ML method. The main
drawbacks of the study are that it is based on a single market and that
it only considers a simple ML method as a benchmark. In addition,
the study focuses on intraday electricity prices, while most of the
literature (including the current paper) considers forecasting day-ahead
electricity prices.
In 2019, the main focus of the papers was the same as in 2018:
(1) evaluating the performance of different deep recurrent networks
(mostly LSTMs) [16,30,45,47,92–94], (2) proposing new hybrid deep
learning methods usually based on LSTMs and CNNs [17,28,36,92,95–
97], or (3) employing regular DNN models [15,46,98]. Similarly, as
with most studies in 2018, the new studies were more limited than [12,
57] as no comparisons with state-of-the-art statistical methods were
made and long test datasets were seldom used. In this context, even
though some studies [16,98] tried to compare the proposed methods
with existing DL models [57], they either failed to re-estimate the
benchmark models for the new case study [16] or they overfitted the
DL benchmark models [98].
In detail, [30] proposes different LSTM models but the new models
are only compared against 5 other ML techniques and using a test
period of 4 weeks. In [28], a CNN model is proposed but the new
model is just compared against three simple ML methods and using
a test dataset that comprises a week. In [45], a model based on an
LSTM is proposed but it is only compared against three simple ML
methods and for a period of 12 weeks. In [46], the performance of
a DNN is compared to that of an SVR model and, as the comparison
only includes these two models, it is obviously very limited. In [15],
a DNN is used as part of a two-step forecasting method; as in many
other studies, the comparison is performed for one month of data and
limited to two simple ML models (a SVR and an MLP) and a standard
linear model. In [47], two DL models are proposed but the models are
only compared to very simple ML methods (extreme learning machines
and standard MLPs) and using a test dataset spanning eight months.
In [16], a bidirectional LSTM to forecast prices in the French market is
proposed; however, the study only considers historical prices as input
features and the proposed method is only compared against DL models
and a simple autoregressive model. In addition, the benchmark DL
models are copied from [57] (a completely different case study that
considers exogenous inputs and a different market) without re-tuning
the hyperparameters to the new case study.
In [98], a neural network that uses data from order books is proposed and compared against DL methods from the literature, e.g. the
ones proposed in [57]. While the new model outperforms existing DL
methods, the DL methods from the literature are trained to overfit the
training dataset.5 Therefore, the comparison is not meaningful (the DL
benchmark models will necessarily perform poorly in the test dataset)
and it cannot be assessed how the new model performs. In [95], a
hybrid DL forecasting method is proposed based on stacked denoising
autoencoders for pre-training, regular autoencodes for feature selection, and a rough DNN as a forecasting method. As in other studies,
the method is only compared against simple ML models. Moreover,
the importance of each of the four modules of the hybrid method
is not studied and the authors do not re-calibrate the models with
new data: the models are trained once and evaluated over a whole
year. Similarly, [96] proposes a CNN hybrid model that uses mutual
information, random forests, gray correlation analysis, and recursive
feature elimination for feature selection. Unlike most models, the algorithm is trained to classify prices instead of predicting their scalar
values; however, details of how this process is done are not provided. In
addition, the method is only compared against simple ML methods and
evaluated for less than a year of data (the study uses one year for testing
and training but the split is not specified). Likewise, [36] proposes a
hybrid model based on CNNs and RNNs in the context of microgrids;
as in other studies, the method is evaluated in a small dataset, it is
not compared against state-of-the-art statistical methods, and the exact
split between training and test datasets is not specified.
2.3. Hybrid methods
Within the field of EPF, the research area that has received the most
attention in the last 5 years has been hybrid forecasting methods. In this
time frame, more than 100 articles proposing new hybrid methods have
been published,6 i.e. approximately 5 times more than articles based on
DL. Hybrid models are very complex forecasting frameworks that are
composed of several algorithms. Usually, they comprise at least two of
the following five modules:
• An algorithm for decomposing data.
• An algorithm for feature selection.
• An algorithm to cluster data.
• One or more forecasting models whose predictions are combined.
• Some type of heuristic optimization algorithm to either estimate
the models or their hyperparameters.
5 In the training dataset, the proposed model and some naive ML benchmark models yield a root mean square error (RMSE) of ca. 6. For the test
dataset, for the same models, the RMSE is between 9 and 12. By contrast, the
training error of the benchmark DL model is 2, and the test error is 20. Having
a training error that is 1/3 of the error of other models but a test error that is
10 times larger than the training error is a clear sign for overfitting (especially
when for the rest of the models the test error is just 1.5 larger than the training
error).
6 This data is based on two searches in Scopus looking for keywords in the
title, abstract, and keywords. The first search is based on the following query
TITLE-ABS-KEY(((forecast*) OR (predict*)) AND (electricity) AND (price*) AND (hybrid)). The second search is very similar
but replacing the keyword hybrid by neural AND network. Note that,
while this search is not as complete as the one for DL, it provides enough
material for building an overview of the state of the field.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
In terms of decomposition methods, the most widely used technique is the wavelet transform [17,19,22,24,34,41,49,51,52,99]. Alternative methods include empirical mode decomposition (EMD) [32,
100], the Hilbert–Huang transform which uses EMD to decompose
a signal and then applies Hilbert spectral analysis [101], variational
mode decomposition [27,48], and singular spectrum analysis [102,
103].
For feature selection, the most commonly utilized algorithms are
correlation analysis [32,41,42,104,105] and the mutual information
technique [18,42,52,106–108]. Other algorithms include classification
and regression trees with recursive feature elimination [50] or ReliefF [50].
For clustering data, the algorithms are usually based on one of the
following four: k-means [26,109], self-organizing maps [19,26,110],
enhanced game theoretic clustering [26], or fuzzy clustering [52,111]
The selection of forecasting models is much more diverse. The most
widely used method is the standard MLP [19,20,32,41,42,51,102,103,
105,107,108], followed by the adaptive network-based fuzzy inference
system (ANFIS) [19,100,106], radial basis function network [20,24,
111], and autoregressive models like ARMA or ARIMA [20,22,24,100].
Other models include LSTM [17], linear regression [50], extreme learning machine [22,50], CNN [50], Bayesian neural network [26,110],
exponential GARCH [100], echo state neural network [27], Elman
neural networks [18], and support vector regressors [20]. It is important to note that in many of the approaches, the hybrid method
does not consider a single forecasting model but combines several of
them [19,20,24,50,100,108].
Just as for the forecasting model, the diversity of the heuristic optimization algorithms is also large. While the most often utilized algorithm is particle swarm optimization [22,48,51,106,107,111],
many other approaches are also used: differential evolution [27],
genetic algorithm [106], backtracking search [106], deterministic annealing [111], bat algorithm [41], vaporization precipitation-based
water cycle algorithm [104], cuckoo search [103,105], or honey bee
mating optimization [24].
In spite of the large number of published works, the research
in hybrid methods suffers from the same problems as discussed earlier. First, most of the studies either avoid comparison with wellestablished methods [18–21,25,27,34,42,48–50,100,104,106,111] or
resort to comparisons using outdated methodologies [22,24,26,41,51,
52,102,103]. Hence, the accuracy of the new proposed methods cannot
be accurately established.
Second, the considered studies usually employ very small datasets
consisting either of a few days [17–22] or a few weeks [18,19,22,24–
27,41,42,49,51,102–104,106,111]. Thus, drawing conclusions is nearly
impossible and it is unclear whether the accuracy results are just the
outcome of selecting a convenient test period.
Besides these two problems, for many hybrid methods the effect
of selecting variants of the different hybrid components is not analyzed [20,21,24,25,27,41,42,50–52,102,103]. Thus, it is not clear how
relevant or useful the individual components are.
2.4. State-of-the-art models
Because of the described problems when comparing EPF models, it
is very hard to establish what are the state-of-the-art methods. Nevertheless, considering the studies performed in the last years, it can be
argued that the LEAR is a very accurate (if not the most accurate) linear
model. Moreover, it can also be argued that the accuracy of this model
can be further improved by transforming the prices using variance
stabilizing transformations, combining forecasts obtained for different
calibration windows, and/or using long-term seasonal decomposition.
For the case of ML models, the selection is harder as the existing comparisons are of worse quality. Considering the most complete
benchmark study in terms of forecasting models [57], it seems that a
simple DNN with two layers is one of the best ML models. In particular,
while more complex models, e.g. LSTMs, could potentially be more
accurate, there is at the moment no sound evidence to validate this
claim.
In the case of hybrid models, establishing what is the best model
is an impossible task. Firstly, while many hybrid methods have been
proposed, they have not been compared with each other nor with the
LEAR or DNN models. Secondly, as most studies do not evaluate the
individual influence of each hybrid component, it is also impossible
to establish the best algorithms for each hybrid component, e.g. it is
unclear what are the best clustering, feature selection method, or data
decomposition methods.
With that in mind, we will consider the LEAR and the DNN for the
proposed open-access benchmark. In particular, not only are these two
methods highly accurate, but they are also relatively simple. As such,
we think that they are the best benchmarks to compare new complex
EPF forecasting methods with.
3. Open-access benchmark dataset
The first contribution of the paper is to provide a large open-access
benchmark dataset on which new methods can be tested, together with
the day-ahead forecasts of the proposed open-access methods. In this
section, we introduce this dataset, which can be accessed7 using the
python library built for this study.
3.1. General characteristics
For a benchmark dataset in EPF to be fair it should satisfy three
conditions:
1. comprise several electricity markets so that the capabilities of
new models can be tested under different conditions,
2. be long enough so that algorithms can be analyzed using out-ofsample datasets that span 1–2 years, and
3. be recent enough to include the effects of integrating renewable
energy sources on wholesale prices.
Based on these conditions, we propose five datasets representing five
different day-ahead electricity markets, each of them comprising 6
years of data. The prices of each market have very distinct dynamics,
i.e. they all have differences in terms of the frequency and existence
of negative prices, zeros, and price spikes. In addition, as electricity
prices depend on exogenous variables, each dataset comprises two
additional time series: day-ahead forecasts of two influential exogenous
factors that differ for each market. The length of each dataset equals
2184 days, which translates to six 364-day "years" or 312 weeks.8 All
available time series are reported using the local time, and the daylight
savings are treated by either arithmetically averaging two values for
the extra hour or interpolating the neighboring values for the missing
observation.
3.2. Nord Pool
The first dataset represents the Nord Pool (NP), i.e. the European
power market of the Nordic countries, and spans from 01.01.2013
to 24.12.2018. The dataset contains hourly observations of day-ahead
prices, the day-ahead load forecast, and the day-ahead wind generation
forecast. The dataset was constructed using data freely available on the
7 Note that we do not own the data in the dataset. However, it can
be freely accessed from different websites, e.g. the ENTSO-E transparency
platform [112]. In this context, the proposed python library [58,59] provides
an interface to easily access the data.
8 Electricity prices exhibit weekly seasonality. Thus, by approximating a
year by 52 weeks because we ensure that the metrics are not impacted by a
certain day, e.g. Monday, being harder to predict than the others.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
webpage of the Nordic power exchange Nord Pool [54]. Fig. 2(b) (top)
displays the electricity price time series of the dataset; as can be seen,
the prices are always positives, zero prices are rare, and prices spikes
seldom occur.
3.3. PJM
The second dataset is obtained from the Pennsylvania–New Jersey–
Maryland (PJM) market in the United States. It covers the same time
period as Nord Pool, i.e. from 01.01.2013 to 24.12.2018. The three time
series are: the zonal prices in the Commonwealth Edison (COMED) (a
zone located in the state of Illinois) and two day-ahead load forecast
series, one describing the system load and the second one the COMED
zonal load. The data is freely available on the PJM’s website [113].
Fig. 2(b) (bottom) depicts the electricity price time series of the dataset;
as with the NP market, the prices are always positive and zero prices
are rare; however, unlike the NP market, spikes appear frequently.
3.4. EPEX-BE
The third dataset represents the EPEX-BE market, the day-ahead
electricity market in Belgium, which is operated by EPEX SPOT. The
dataset spans from 09.01.2011 to 31.12.2016. The two exogenous
data series represent the day-ahead load forecast and the day-ahead
generation forecast in France. While this selection might be surprising,
it has been shown [57] that these two are the best predictors of Belgian
prices. The price data is freely available in the ENTSO-E transparency
platform [112] and the ELIA website [114], and the load and generation day-ahead forecasts are freely available in [115]. It is important to
note that this dataset is particularly interesting because it is harder to
predict. Fig. 3 (top) shows the electricity price time series of the dataset;
unlike the prices in the PJM and NP markets, negative prices and zero
prices appear more frequently, and price spikes are very common.
3.5. EPEX-FR
The fourth dataset represents the EPEX-FR market, the day-ahead
electricity market in France, which is also operated by EPEX SPOT.
The dataset spans the same period as the EPEX-BE dataset, i.e. from
09.01.2011 to 31.12.2016. Besides the electricity prices, the dataset
comprises the day-ahead load forecast and the day-ahead generation
forecast. As before, the price data is freely obtained from the ENTSO-E
transparency platform [112], and the load and generation day-ahead
forecasts are freely available on the webpage of RTE [115], i.e. the
transmission system operator (TSO) in France. Fig. 3 (middle) displays
the electricity price time series of the dataset; as in the EPEX-BE market,
negative prices, zero prices, and spikes are very common.
3.6. EPEX-DE
The last dataset describes the EPEX-DE market, the German electricity market, which is also operated by EPEX SPOT. The dataset spans
from 09.01.2012 to 31.12.2017. Besides the prices, the dataset comprises the day-ahead zonal load forecast in the TSO Amprion zone and
the aggregated day-ahead wind and solar generation forecasts in the
zones of the 3 largest9 TSOs (Amprion, TenneT, and 50Hertz). The price
data is freely obtained from the ENTSO-E transparency platform [112],
the zonal load day-ahead forecasts is freely available in the website
of Amprion [116], and the wind and solar forecasts in the websites
of Amprion [116], 50Hertz [117], and TenneT [118]. Fig. 3 (bottom)
displays the electricity price time series of the dataset; as can be seen,
while negative and zero prices occur more often than in the other four
markets, price spikes are more rare.
9 There are 4 TSOs in Germany.
Table 1
Start and end dates of the testing (out-of-sample) datasets for each electricity market.
Market
Test period
Nord pool
27.12.2016–24.12.2018
PJM
27.12.2016–24.12.2018
EPEX-FR
04.01.2015–31.12.2016
EPEX-BE
04.01.2015–31.12.2016
EPEX-DE
04.01.2016–31.12.2017
3.7. Training and testing periods
For each dataset, the testing period is defined as the last 104 weeks,
i.e. the last two years, of the dataset. The exact dates of the testing
datasets are defined in Table 1. It is important to note that, as we
will argue in Section 5, selecting two years as the testing period is
paramount to ensure good research practices in EPF.
Unlike the testing dataset, the training dataset cannot be defined as
it will vary between different models. In general, the training dataset
will comprise any data that is known prior to the target day. However,
the exact data will change depending on two concepts, i.e. calibration
window and recalibration:
• While there are four years of data available for estimating the
model, it might be desirable to employ only recent data, e.g. to
avoid estimating effects that no longer play a role. The amount of
past data employed for estimation defines the calibration window.
• The model can be estimated once and then evaluated for the full
test dataset, or it can be continuously recalibrated on a daily basis
to incorporate the input of recent data.
For example, let us consider predicting the NP prices on 15.02.2017.
A model using a calibration window of 52 weeks and no recalibration would employ a training dataset comprising the data between
29.12.2016 and 26.12.2016, i.e. one year prior to the start of the test
period. By contrast, a model using a calibration window of 104 weeks
and daily recalibration would employ the data between 18.02.2015 and
14.02.2017.
4. Open-access benchmark models
The second contribution of the paper is to provide a set of stateof-the-art forecasting methods as an open-source python toolbox. As
explained in Section 2.4, the LEAR [55] and the DNN [57] models
are not only highly accurate but also relatively simple. Therefore, we
implement these two methods and provide their code freely available
as part of the proposed toolbox [58,59]. It is important to note that
the use of the proposed open-access methods is fully documented
and automated so researchers can test and use them without expert
knowledge.
For the sake of simplicity, the description provided here is limited
to the bare minimum. For further details on the two models we refer
to the original papers [55,57].
4.1. Input features
Before describing each model, let us define the input features that
are considered. Independently of the model, the available input features
to forecast the 24 day-ahead prices of day 𝑑, i.e. 𝐩𝑑= [𝑝𝑑,1, … , 𝑝𝑑,24]⊤,
are the same:
• Historical day-ahead prices of the previous three days and one
week ago, i.e. 𝐩𝑑−1, 𝐩𝑑−2, 𝐩𝑑−3, 𝐩𝑑−7.
• The day-ahead forecasts of the two variables of interest (see
Section 3 for details) for day 𝑑available on day 𝑑−1, i.e. 𝐱1
𝑑=
[𝑥1
𝑑,1, … , 𝑥1
𝑑,24]⊤and 𝐱2
𝑑= [𝑥2
𝑑,1, … , 𝑥2
𝑑,24]⊤; note that the variables
of interest are different for each market.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Fig. 2. Electricity price time series for two of the five datasets, i.e. Nord Pool and PJM, considered in the open-access benchmark dataset. Note that each dataset also includes
two exogenous time series that are not plotted here.
• Historical day-ahead forecasts of the variables of interest the
previous day and one week ago, i.e. 𝐱1
𝑑−1, 𝐱1
𝑑−7, 𝐱2
𝑑−1, 𝐱2
𝑑−7.
• A dummy variable 𝐳𝑑that represents the day of the week. In the
case of the linear model, following the standard practice in the
literature [55,69,81], this is a binary vector 𝐳= [𝑧𝑑,1, … , 𝑧𝑑,7]⊤
that encodes every day of the week by setting all elements to
zero except the element that identifies the day of the week, e.g.
[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] represents Monday and [0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] Tuesday.
In the case of the neural network, for the sake of simplicity,
the day of the week is modeled with a multi-value input 𝑧𝑑∈
{1, … , 7}.
Overall, we consider a total of 247 available input features for
each LEAR model and 241 input features for each DNN model. It
is important to note that, while the available input features are the
same, the LEAR and DNN models utilize a different feature selection
procedure. Namely, each of the LEAR models finds the optimal set
of features using LASSO as an embedded feature selection, i.e. each
model uses L1-regularization to select among the 247 features. On the
other hand, in the DNN model, as in the original study [57], the input
features are optimized together with the hyperparameters using the tree
Parzen estimator [119] (see Section 4.3 for details). Finally, it should
be emphasized that for both types of models the feature selection is
fully automated and does not require expert intervention.
4.2. The LEAR model
The Lasso Estimated AutoRegressive (LEAR) model is a parameter-rich
ARX structure estimated using L1-regularization, i.e. the LASSO [56].
It was originally introduced in [55] under the name LassoX. The LEAR
is based on the so-called full ARX or fARX model, a parameter-rich
autoregressive specification with exogenous variables, which in turn
is inspired by the general autoregressive model defined by Equation
(2) in [68], with some important differences. While fARX includes
fundamentals and a much richer seasonal structure, it does not look
too far into the past and concentrates only on the last week of data.
Note, that very similar models to the LEAR were used in [64] under
the name 24lasso𝐷𝑜𝑊,𝑛𝑙and in [69] under the name 24Lasso1.
To enhance the model, as empirically tested and recommended
in [9,64,69], the data is preprocessed with the area (or inverse) hyperbolic sine variance stabilizing transformation:
asinh(𝑥) = log
𝑥+
𝑥2 + 1
(2)
where 𝑥is the price standardized by subtracting the in-sample median
and dividing by the median absolute deviation adjusted by a factor
for asymptotically normal consistency to the standard deviation, for
details see [9]. Long-term seasonal decomposition is not considered
for the sake of simplicity; particularly, while it has been shown to
further improve the performance of the LEAR, we leave it out for future
research.
As in [81], to further enhance the model, we recalibrate it daily
over different calibration window lengths: 8 weeks, 12 weeks, 3 years,
and 4 years. We consider short windows (8–12 weeks) in combination
with long windows (3–4 years) because it has been empirically shown
to lead to better results [81]. In this context, we consider a minimum
of 8 weeks as lower windows might not have enough information to
correctly estimate parameter-rich models [81].
The LEAR model to predict price 𝑝𝑑,ℎon day 𝑑and hour ℎis defined
by:
𝑝𝑑,ℎ=𝑓(𝐩𝑑−1, 𝐩𝑑−2, 𝐩𝑑−3, 𝐩𝑑−7, 𝐱𝑖
𝑑, 𝐱𝑖
𝑑−1, 𝐱𝑖
𝑑−7, 𝜽ℎ) + 𝜀𝑑,ℎ
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,𝑖⋅𝑝𝑑−1,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,24+𝑖⋅𝑝𝑑−2,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,48+𝑖⋅𝑝𝑑−3,𝑖+
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,72+𝑖⋅𝑝𝑑−7,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,96+𝑖⋅𝑥1
𝑑,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,120+𝑖⋅𝑥2
𝑑,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,144+𝑖⋅𝑥1
𝑑−1,𝑖+
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,168+𝑖⋅𝑥2
𝑑−1,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,192+𝑖⋅𝑥1
𝑑−7,𝑖+
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,216+𝑖⋅𝑥2
𝑑−7,𝑖
𝑖=1
𝜃ℎ,240+𝑖⋅𝑧𝑑,𝑖
+ 𝜀𝑑,ℎ
(3)

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Fig. 3. Electricity price time series for three of the five datasets, i.e. EPEX-BE, EPEX-FR, and EPEX-DE, considered in the open-access benchmark dataset. Note that each dataset
also includes two exogenous time series that are not plotted here. The EPEX-BE and EPEX-FR time series are similar because the EPEX-FR and EPEX-BE are highly coupled
markets [57]. To keep the plots readable, the upper limit of the 𝑦-axis is below the maximum price; this only affects one spike in EPEX-FR and another one in EPEX-BE.
where 𝜽ℎ
= [𝜃ℎ,1, … , 𝜃ℎ,247]⊤are the 247 parameters of the LEAR
model for hour ℎ. Many of these parameters become zero when (3) is
estimated using LASSO:
̂𝜽ℎ= argmin
𝜽ℎ
RSS + 𝜆‖‖𝜽ℎ‖‖1 = argmin
𝜽ℎ
RSS + 𝜆
𝑖=1
||𝜃ℎ,𝑖|| ,
(4)
where RSS = ∑𝑁𝑑
𝑑=8(𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ)2 is the sum of squared residuals, ̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ
the price forecast, 𝑁𝑑is the number of days in the training dataset,
and 𝜆≥0 is the tuning (or regularization) hyperparameter of LASSO.
Due to the computational speed of estimating with LASSO, during
every daily recalibration, the hyperparameter 𝜆that regulates the L1
penalty is optimized. This can be done using an ex-ante cross-validation
procedure [120]. In this study, to further reduce the computational
cost, we propose an efficient hybrid approach to perform the optimal
selection of 𝜆. See Section 4.2.2 for details.
4.2.1. Regularization hyperparameter
The hyperparameter 𝜆of LASSO can be optimized in multiple ways,
each with different advantages and disadvantages. A first approach is
to optimize 𝜆once and then keep it fixed for the whole test period.
Although it requires very low computation costs, the limitation of
this approach is that it assumes that the hyperparameter 𝜆does not
change over time. This assumption might hinder the performance of the
estimator as the regularization parameter does not change even when
the market might do.
A second approach is to recalibrate the hyperparameter on a periodic basis using a validation dataset. Although this method yields good
results, tuning the recalibration frequency and calibration window is
complicated, the computational cost is large, and the results may vary
between datasets [69].
A third option is to recalibrate the hyperparameter periodically, but
using cross-validation (CV): splitting the data into disjoint partitions,
using each possible partition once as a test dataset with the remaining
data as the training dataset, and selecting the hyperparameter that
performs the best across all partitions [120]. Although this approach
is highly accurate, its computation costs are very large.
A fourth option is to periodically update the hyperparameter but
using information criteria, e.g. the Akaike information criterion (AIC) or
the Bayesian information criterion [64,68,121]. As before, this involves
training multiple LASSO models to compute the information criteria
for each possible hyperparameter value, which in turn leads to a high
computational cost.
Lastly, one can use the least angle regression (LARS) LASSO [122] for
estimating the model instead of the coordinate descent implementation.
This estimation procedure has the advantage of computing the whole
LASSO solution path, which in turn allows to compute the information
criteria or perform CV much faster.
4.2.2. Selecting the regularization hyperparameter
To select 𝜆we propose a hybrid approach. On a daily basis, we
estimate the hyperparameter using the LARS method with the in-sample

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Fig. 4. Visualization of a sample DNN model.
AIC. Then, using the optimal 𝜆obtained from the LARS method, we
recalibrate the LEAR using the traditional coordinate descent implementation.
The reason for proposing this hybrid approach is that it provides
a good trade-off between computational complexity and accuracy. In
particular, it leverages the computational efficiency of LARS for exante 𝜆selection with the predictive performance on short calibration
windows of the coordinate descent LASSO.
It is important to note that we have studied multiple approaches to
select 𝜆: (i) daily recalibration, CV, with coordinate descent; (ii) daily
recalibration, CV, with LARS; (iii) daily recalibration with LARS and
AIC. However, the computational cost of the first method was too high
(in the same order of magnitude as the cost of the DNN model), and
the accuracy of the other two was not good. By contrast, the proposed
approach had a performance on par with coordinate descent LASSO
using CV, but with a computational cost that was an order of magnitude
lower.
4.3. The DNN model
The second model is the DNN [57], one of the simplest DL models whose input features and hyperparameters can be optimized and
tailored for each case study without the need for expert knowledge.
The DNN is a straightforward extension of the traditional multilayer
perceptron (MLP) with two hidden layers.
4.3.1. Structure
The DNN is a deep feedforward neural network that contains 4
layers, employs the multivariate framework (single model with 24
outputs), is estimated using Adam [123], and its hyperparameters and
input features are optimized using the tree Parzen estimator [119], i.e.
a Bayesian optimization algorithm. Its structure is visualized in Fig. 4.
4.3.2. Training dataset
For estimating the hyperparameters, the training dataset is fixed
and comprises the four years prior to the testing period. For evaluating
the testing dataset, the DNN is recalibrated on a daily basis using a
calibration window of four years.
In all cases, the training dataset is split into a training and a validation dataset, with the latter being used for two purposes: performing
early stopping [124] to avoid overfitting and optimizing hyperparameters/features. While the validation dataset always comprises 42
weeks, the split between the training and validation datasets depends
on whether the validation dataset is used for hyperparameter/feature
selection or for the recalibration step:
• For estimating the hyperparameters, as the validation dataset is
used to guide the optimization process, the validation dataset
is selected as the last 42 weeks of the training dataset. This
is done to keep the training and validation datasets completely
independent and to avoid overfitting.10
• For the testing phase, as the validation dataset is only used for
early stopping, it is defined by randomly selecting 42 weeks out of
the total 208 weeks employed for training. This is done to ensure
that the dataset used for optimizing the DNN parameters includes
up-to-date data.11
As example, let us consider the training and evaluation of a DNN in
the Nord Pool market. Before evaluating the DNN, the hyperparameter
and features of the DNN are optimized. For that, the employed dataset
comprises the data between 01.01.2013 and 26.12.2016, of which
the training dataset represents the first 166 weeks, i.e. 01.01.2013 to
07.03.2016, and the validation dataset the last 42, i.e. 08.03.2016 to
26.12.2016. During the evaluation of the model, i.e. after the hyperparameter and feature selection, the training and validation datasets
comprise the last four years of data but are randomly shuffled. For
example, to evaluate the DNN during 15.02.2017, the training and
validation datasets would represent the data between 20.02.2013 and
14.02.2017, of which 166 randomly selected weeks would define the
training dataset and the remaining 42 the validation dataset.
4.3.3. Hyperparameter and feature selection
As in the original DNN paper [57], the hyperparameters and input
features are optimized together using the tree-structured Parzen estimator [119], a Bayesian optimization algorithm based on sequential
model-based optimization. To do so, the features are modeled as hyperparameters, with each hyperparameter representing a binary variable
that selects whether or not a specific feature is included in the model (as
explained in [57]). In more detail, to select which of the 241 available
input features are relevant, the method employs 11 decision variables,
i.e. 11 hyperparameters:
• Four binary hyperparameters (1–4) that indicate whether or not
to include the historical day ahead prices 𝐩𝑑−1, 𝐩𝑑−2, 𝐩𝑑−3, 𝐩𝑑−7.
The selection is done per day,12 e.g. the algorithm either selects
all 24 hourly prices 𝐩𝑑−𝑗of 𝑗days ago or does not select any price
from day 𝑑−𝑗, hence the four hyperparameters.
• Two binary hyperparameters (5–6) that indicate whether or not
to include each of the day-ahead forecasts 𝐱1
𝑑and 𝐱2
𝑑. As with the
past prices, this is done for the whole day, i.e. a hyperparameter
either selects all the elements in 𝐱𝑗
𝑑or none.
• Four binary hyperparameters (7–10) that indicate whether or not
to include the historical day-ahead forecasts 𝐱1
𝑑−1, 𝐱2
𝑑−1, 𝐱1
𝑑−7, and
𝐱2
𝑑−7. This selection is also done per day.
• One binary hyperparameter (11) that indicates whether or not to
include the variable 𝑧𝑑representing the day of the week.
In short, 10 binary hyperparameters indicating whether or not to
include 24 inputs each and another binary hyperparameter indicating
whether or not to include a dummy variable.
10 Similar as it is done when splitting the dataset between the training and
the test dataset.
11 For hyperparameter optimization, as the validation dataset represents the
most recent weeks of data, the neural network is trained with data that is
almost one year old. While this is not a big problem when deciding on the
DNN structure, it should be avoided during testing to ensure that the DNN
captures new market effects.
12 This is done for the sake of simplicity to speed up the optimization
procedure of the feature selection. In particular, an alternative could be to
use a binary hyperparameter for each individual historical prices; however, in
most markets, that would mean using 24 as many hyperparameters as there
are 24 different prices per day.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Besides selecting the features, the algorithm also optimizes eight
additional hyperparameters: (1) the number of neurons per layer, (2)
the activation function, (3) the dropout rate, (4) the learning rate,
(5) whether or not to use batch normalization, (6) the type of data
preprocessing technique, (7) the initialization of the DNN weights, and
(8) the coefficient for L1 regularization that is applied to each layer’s
kernel.
Unlike the weights of the DNN that are recalibrated on a daily basis,
the hyperparameter and features are optimized only once using the four
years of data prior to the testing period. It is important to note that the
algorithm runs for a number 𝑇of iterations, where at every iteration the
algorithm infers a potential optimal subset of hyperparameters/features
and evaluates this subset in the validation dataset. For the proposed
open-access benchmark models, 𝑇is selected as 1500 iterations to
obtain a trade-off between accuracy and computational requirements.13
4.4. Ensembles
For the open-access benchmark, in order to have benchmark predictions when evaluating ensemble techniques, we also propose ensembles
of LEAR and DNNs as open-access benchmarks of ensembles methods.
For the LEAR, the ensemble is built as the arithmetic average of
forecasts across four calibration window lengths: 8 weeks, 12 weeks,
3 years, and 4 years. For the DNN, the ensemble is built as the arithmetic average of four different DNNs that are estimated by running the
hyperparameter/feature selection procedure four times. In particular,
the hyperparameter optimization is asymptotically deterministic, i.e.
the global optimum is found for an infinite number of iterations.
However, for a finite number of iterations and using a different initial
random seed, the algorithm is non-deterministic and every run provides
a different set of hyperparameters and features. Although each of
these hyperparameter/feature subsets represent a local minimum, it is
impossible to establish which of the subsets is better as their relative
performance on the validation dataset is nearly identical. This effect
can be explained by the fact that the DNN is a very flexible model and
thus different network architectures are able to obtain equally good
results.
4.5. Software implementation
The proposed open-access models are developed in python: the
LEAR is implemented using the scikit-learn library [125] and
the DNN model using the Keras library [126]. The reason for selecting python is that it is one of the most widely used programming
languages, especially in the context of ML and statistical inference.
5. Guidelines and best practices in EPF
As motivated in the introduction, the field of EPF suffers from
several problems that prevent having reproducible research and establishing strong conclusions on what methods work best. In this section,
we outline some of these issues and provide some guidelines on how
to address them.
13 It can be empirically observed that the performance of the models barely
improves after 1000 iterations. Moreover, performing 1500 iterations takes
approximately just one day on a regular quadcore laptop like the i7-6920HQ,
a computation cost very acceptable when the algorithm has to run only once.
5.1. Length of the test period
A common practice in EPF is to evaluate new methods on very
short test periods. The typical approach is to evaluate the method on
4 weeks of data [18,19,22,24–26,29,30,41,42,49,51,97,102–107,110],
with each week representing one of the four seasons in the year. This
is problematic for three reasons:
• Selecting four weeks can lead to cherry-picking the weeks where a
given method excels, e.g. a method that performs bad with spikes
could be evaluated in a week with fewer spikes, leading in turn
to biased estimations of the forecasting accuracy. While this is an
ethical issue that most researchers would avoid, establishing four
week testing periods as the standard does facilitate malpractice
and should be avoided.
• Assuming that the four weeks are randomly selected and no bias
is introduced in the selection, it is still not possible to guarantee
that these four weeks are representative of the price behavior over
a whole year. Particularly, even within a given season, the price
dynamics can change dramatically, e.g. during winter there are
weeks with a lot of sun and wind but there are also weeks without
them. Therefore, picking only a week per season rarely represents
the average performance of a forecaster in a given dataset.
• There are situations in the electrical grid that do not occur very
often but that can have a very large effect on electricity prices,
e.g. when several power plants are under maintenance at the
same time. Forecasting methods need to be evaluated under those
conditions to ensure that they are also accurate under extreme
events. By selecting four weeks most of these effects are neglected.
To avoid this problem, we recommend using a minimum of one year
as a testing period. This ensures that forecasting methods are evaluated
considering the complete set of effects that take place during the year.
To guarantee that all researchers have access to this type of data, the
open-access benchmark dataset that we propose contains data from
several markets and employs a testing period of two years. In addition,
the open-access benchmark can be directly accessed using the proposed
epftoolbox library [58,59].
5.2. Benchmark models
A second issue with many EPF publications is that new methods
are not compared with well-established methods [14,16,18–21,23,25,
27,34,36,42,46,48–50,88,100,104,106,111] or resort to comparisons
using either outdated methodologies or simplified methods [13,15,22,
24,26,28–30,37,41,44,45,47,51,52,95,96,102,103].
This poses a problem since it becomes very hard to establish which
algorithms work best and which ones do not. To address this issue, we recommend using well-established state-of-the-art open-source
methods and a common benchmark dataset. With that in mind, we
have provided and made freely available an open-access benchmark
dataset comprising 5 markets (as described in Section 3), and we have
implemented, thoroughly tested, and made freely available two stateof-the-art forecasting methods (as described in Section 4) and their
day-ahead predictions for all 5 datasets over a period of two years (as
described in Section 6). Additionally, we have implemented all these
resources in an easy-to-use toolbox [58] and adequately documentated
it [59].
5.3. Open-access
A third issue in the field of EPF is that datasets are usually not made
publicly available and the code of the proposed methods is not shared.
This poses four obvious problems:

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
• Research cannot be reproduced as data is not available. This goes
against one of the main principles of science as all research should
be reproducible.
• The progress of EPF research is hindered since it is hard to establish which methodologies work well. Consequently, researchers
spend unnecessary time re-evaluating methodologies that have
been evaluated already.
• Comparing new methods with published ones becomes very challenging because researchers have to re-implement methods from
the literature. As a result, comparisons with state-of-the-art methods are often avoided, and new methods are usually compared
with simple and easy-to-implement methods.
• When new methods are proposed, they cannot be compared with
published methods under the same circumstances. This leads to
comparisons under different conditions and opens up the door to
wrong implementations of the original methods, which in turn
leads to results that are not correct.
As these problems are critical, we directly try to address them by
providing an open-access benchmark/toolbox comprising five datasets,
two state-of-the-art methods, and a set of day-ahead forecasts of the
latter two methods. In addition, we encourage researchers in EPF to
share the developed codes and to either share their datasets or use an
open-access benchmark dataset.
5.4. Evaluation metrics for point forecasts
In the field of EPF, the most widely used metrics to measure the
accuracy of point forecasts are the mean absolute error (MAE), the
root mean square error (RMSE), and the mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE):
MAE =
24 𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ|,
(5)
RMSE =
24 𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
(𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ)2,
(6)
MAPE =
24 𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ|
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ|
(7)
where 𝑝𝑑,ℎand ̂𝑝𝑑,ℎrespectively represent the real and forecasted price
on day 𝑑and hour ℎ, and 𝑁d is the number of days in the out-of-sample
test period, i.e. in the test dataset.
Since absolute errors are hard to compare between different
datasets, the MAE and RMSE are not always very informative. Moreover, since electricity costs and profits are often linearly dependent on
the electricity prices, metrics based on quadratic errors, e.g. RMSE, are
hard to interpret and do not accurately represent the underlying problem of most forecasting users. In particular, in most electricity trade
applications, the underlying risk, profits, and costs depend linearly on
the price and on the forecasting errors. Hence, linear metrics represent
better than quadratic metrics the underlying risks of forecasting errors.
Similarly, since MAPE values become very large with prices close
to zero (regardless of the actual absolute errors), the MAPE is usually
dominated by the periods of low prices and is also not very informative.
While the symmetric mean absolute percentage error (sMAPE) defined14
as:
sMAPE =
24 𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ|
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ| + | ̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ|
(8)
solves some of these issues, it has (as any metric based on percentage errors) a statistical distribution with undefined mean and infinite
variance [128].
14 Note, that there are multiple versions of sMAPE, here we consider the
most sensible one according to [127].
5.4.1. Scaled errors
In this context, several studies advocate for the use of scaled errors [5,128,129], where a scaled error is simply the MAE scaled by
the in-sample MAE of a naive forecast. A scaled error has the nice
interpretation of being lower/larger than one if it is better/worse than
the average naive forecast evaluated in-sample.
A metric based on this concept is the mean absolute scaled error
(MASE), and in the context of one-step ahead forecasting is defined
as [128]:
MASE = 1
𝑁
𝑁
𝑘=1
|𝑝𝑘−̂𝑝𝑘|
𝑛−1
∑𝑛
𝑖=2 |𝑝in
𝑖−𝑝in
𝑖−1|
(9)
where 𝑝in
𝑖
is the 𝑖th price in the in-sample, i.e. training, dataset (note
that in EPF 𝑖= 24𝑑+ℎ), 𝑝in
𝑖−1 is the one-step ahead naive forecast of 𝑝in
𝑖,
i.e. ̂𝑝in
𝑖, 𝑁is the number of out-of-sample (test) datapoints, and 𝑛the
number of in-sample (training) datapoints. For seasonal time series, the
MASE may be defined using the MAE of a seasonal naive model in the
denominator [5,129].
5.4.2. Relative measures
While scaled errors do indeed solve the issues of more traditional
metrics, they have other associated problems that make them unsuitable in the context of EPF:
1. As MASE depends on the in-sample dataset, forecasting methods with different calibration windows will naturally have to
consider different in-sample datasets. As a result, the MASE
of each model will be based on a different scaling factor and
comparisons between models cannot be drawn.
2. The same argument applies to models with and without rolling
windows. The latter will use a different in-sample dataset at every time point while the former will keep the in-sample dataset
constant.
3. In ensembles of models with different calibration windows, the
MASE cannot be defined as the calibration window of the ensemble is undefined.
4. Drawing comparisons across different time series is problematic
as electricity prices are not stationary. For example, an in-sample
dataset with spikes and an out-of-sample dataset without spikes
will lead to a smaller MASE than if we consider the same market
but with the in-sample/out-sample datasets reversed.
To solve these issues, we argue that a better metric is the relative
MAE (rMAE) [128,130]. Similar to MASE, it normalizes the error by
the MAE of a naive forecast. However, instead of considering the insample dataset, the naive forecast is built based on the out-of-sample
dataset. For day-ahead electricity prices of hourly frequency, rMAE is
defined as:
rMAE =
24𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎ|
24𝑁d
𝑁d
𝑑=1
ℎ=1
|𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝naive
𝑑,ℎ|
(10)
where the
24𝑁𝑑factor cancels out in the numerator and the denominator. There are three natural choices for the naive forecasts:
• ̂𝑝naive,1
𝑑,ℎ
= 𝑝𝑑−1,ℎ,
• ̂𝑝naive,2
𝑑,ℎ
= 𝑝𝑑−7,ℎ,
• ̂𝑝naive,3
𝑑,ℎ
𝑝𝑑−1,ℎ,
if 𝑑is Tue, Wed, Thu, or Fri,
𝑝𝑑−7,ℎ,
if 𝑑is Sat, Sun, or Mon.
In the context of EPF, rMAE using ̂𝑝naive,2
𝑑,ℎ
= 𝑝𝑑−7,ℎis arguably the
best choice for two reasons: (i) it is easier to compute than the one
based on ̂𝑝naive,3
𝑑,ℎ
and, unlike the rMAE based on ̂𝑝naive,1
𝑑,ℎ
, it captures
weekly effects; (ii) given a set of forecasting models, the relative

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
ranking of the accuracy of the models is independent from the naive
benchmark used (see the last paragraph of this subsection for an
explanation). Hence, in the remainder of the article we will use rMAE
to explicitly refer to the rMAE based on ̂𝑝naive,2
𝑑,ℎ
. It is important to note
that, similar to rMAE, one could also define the relative RMSE (rRMSE)
by dividing the RMSE of each forecast by the RMSE of a naive forecast.
Since the dependence on the in-sample dataset is removed, using
a rolling window is no longer a problem as the out-of-sample dataset
stays the same. Similarly, models with different calibration windows
can be compared and the rMAE of ensembles is properly defined. Moreover, as the metric is normalized by the MAE of a naive forecast for the
same sample, the problem with drawing conclusions in non-stationary
time series is mitigated.
Due to its better properties, rMAE should always be used to evaluate
new methods in EPF. In particular, while it can be used in conjunction
with other metrics, it is important to include and employ rMAE to
obtain more fair evaluations and comparisons.
With that in mind, the accuracy of the open-access models in the
open-access benchmark dataset is computed considering rMAE, sMAPE,
MAPE, MAE, and RMSE. Then, an analysis of the different metrics
is provided (see Section 6.4.2). Finally, the forecasts themselves are
provided as csv files so that the accuracy results can be updated in case
more adequate metrics are developed in the future.
As a final remark, let us note that, given a set of forecasting models,
the relative ranking of the accuracy of the models is independent from
the naive benchmark used for the rMAE or MASE. Changing it simply
changes the denominator but preserves the numerator, and since the
change in the denominator is the same across all methods, the relative
ranking is preserved. Furthermore, as the numerator is the MAE, it
follows that the ranking based on the rMAE or MASE will be the same
as that based on the MAE.
5.5. Statistical testing
While using adequate metrics to compare the accuracy of the forecasts is important, it is also necessary to analyze whether any difference
in accuracy is statistically significant. This is paramount to conclude
whether the difference in accuracy does really exist and is not simply
due to random differences between the forecasts. Despite its importance, the use of statistical testing has been downplayed in the EPF
literature [5]. In particular, most publications only compare the accuracy in terms of an error metric and do not analyze the statistical
significance of the accuracy differences. This trend needs to be corrected in order to compare forecasting approaches with statistical rigor.
Particularly, new studies need to ensure that:
• Any new method is compared against well-established methods
using a statistical test.
• The forecasts of the proposed methods are provided as openaccess datasets. This ensures that, when new models are proposed,
the difference in accuracy with the published methods can be
analyzed in terms of statistical testing.
To facilitate statistical testing, we include in the proposed opensource epftoolbox library [58,59] the two most widely used statistical tests in EPF, i.e. the Diebold–Mariano and the Giacomini–White
tests.
5.5.1. The Diebold–Mariano test
The Diebold–Mariano (DM) test [131] is probably the most commonly used tool to evaluate the significance of differences in forecasting accuracy. It is an asymptotic z-test of the hypothesis that the mean
of the loss differential series:
𝛥A,B
𝑑,ℎ= 𝐿(𝜀A
𝑑,ℎ) −𝐿(𝜀B
𝑑,ℎ)
(11)
is zero, where 𝜀Z
𝑑,ℎ= 𝑝𝑑,ℎ−̂𝑝𝑑,ℎis the prediction error of model Z for
day 𝑑and hour ℎ, and 𝐿(⋅) is the loss function. For point forecasts,
we usually take 𝐿(𝜀Z
𝑑,ℎ) = |𝜀Z
𝑑,ℎ|𝑝with 𝑝= 1 or 2, which corresponds
to the absolute and squared losses, respectively; for probabilistic forecasts, 𝐿(⋅) may be any strictly proper scoring rule, in particular the
pinball loss, the continuous ranked probability score (CRPS), or the energy
score [6,63,65]. Given the loss differential series, we compute the
statistic:
DM =
𝑁̂𝜇
̂𝜎,
(12)
where ̂𝜇and ̂𝜎are the sample mean and standard deviation of 𝛥A,B
𝑑,ℎ,
respectively, and 𝑁is the length of the out-of-sample test period. Under
the assumption of covariance stationarity of 𝛥A,B
𝑑,ℎ, the DM statistic is
asymptotically standard normal, and one- or two-sided asymptotic tail
probabilities can be easily computed.
It is important to note three things. Firstly, the DM test is modelfree, i.e. it compares forecasts (of models), not models themselves.
Secondly, although in the standard formulation [131] the DM test compares forecasts via the null hypothesis of the expected loss differential
being zero, it is more informative to compute the 𝑝-values of two
one-sided tests:
1. with the null hypothesis 𝐻0 ∶𝐸(𝛥A,B
𝑑,ℎ) ≤0,
2. with the alternative hypothesis null 𝐻1 ∶𝐸(𝛥A,B
𝑑,ℎ) ≥0.
The lower the 𝑝-value,15 i.e. the closer it is to zero, the more the
observed data is inconsistent with the null hypothesis. If the 𝑝-value
is less than the commonly accepted level of 5%, the null hypothesis is
typically rejected. In the DM test, this means that the forecasts of model
B are significantly more accurate than those of model A.
Thirdly, the DM test requires (only) that the loss differential be
covariance stationary.16 This may not be satisfied by forecasts in dayahead markets, since the predictions for all 24 h of the next day are
computed at the same time, using the same information set. Hence,
following [63], we recommend two variants of the DM test in the
context of day-ahead EPF:
• a univariate variant with 24 independent tests performed,17 one
for each hour of the day, and comparisons based on the number
of hours for which the predictions of one model are significantly
better than those of another, i.e. the number of hours for which
the null hypothesis is rejected,
• a multivariate variant with the test performed jointly for all hours
using the ‘daily’ or multivariate loss differential series:
𝛥A,B
𝑑
= ‖𝜀A
𝑑‖𝑝−‖𝜀B
𝑑‖𝑝,
(13)
where 𝜀Z
𝑑is the 24-dimensional vector of prediction errors of
model Z for day 𝑑, ‖𝜀Z
𝑑‖𝑝= (∑24
ℎ=1 |𝜀Z
𝑑,ℎ|𝑝)1∕𝑝is the 𝑝th norm of
that vector with 𝑝= 1 or 2.
The univariate version of the test has the advantage of providing a
deeper analysis as it indicates which forecast is significantly better for
which hour of the day [6,55,57,65,133,134]. The multivariate version,
introduced in [64], enables a better representation of the results as it
summarizes the comparison in a single 𝑝-value, which can be conveniently visualized using heat maps arranged as chessboards [9,10,69,
80], see Fig. 5.
15 Recall, that the 𝑝-value is the probability of obtaining results (in our case
— loss differentials) at least as large as the ones actually observed, assuming
that the null hypothesis is correct.
16 Actually covariance stationarity is sufficient but may not be strictly
necessary [132].
17 We assume that a day-ahead market has 24 prices. For markets with prices
every half hour, the univariate variant comprises 48 independent tests.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
5.5.2. The Giacomini–White test
In some of the more recent EPF studies [81,135,136], the DM test
has been replaced by the Giacomini–White (GW) test [137] for conditional predictive ability. The latter is preferred because it can be regarded
as a generalization of the DM test for unconditional predictive ability:
while both tests can be used for nested and non-nested models,18 only
the GW test accounts for parameter estimation uncertainty through
‘conditioning’ [63].
Like the DM test, also the GW test has two variants in day-ahead EPF
— the univariate and the multivariate. Without loss of generality, let us
focus on the latter. It starts by building a multivariate loss differential
series, see (13), for a pair of forecasts (of models A and B). Next, the
test considers the following regression:
𝛥A,B
𝑑
= 𝝓′𝑋𝑑−1 + 𝜖𝑑,
(14)
where 𝑋𝑑−1 contains elements from the information set on day 𝑑−1,
i.e. a constant and lags of 𝛥A,B
𝑑
. Note that 𝜖𝑑≠𝜀Z
𝑑, i.e. 𝜖𝑑is not the
24-dimensional vector of prediction errors for day 𝑑and model 𝑍but
simply an error term in the regression. Also note that using this notation
the DM test can be written as [138]:
𝛥A,B
𝑑
= 𝜇+ 𝜖𝑑,
(15)
i.e. with 𝑋𝑑−1 containing just a constant. Finally, like for the DM test,
to check the significance of differences in forecasting accuracy, the 𝑝-
values of two one-sided tests can be computed. The interpretation and
possible visualization (see Fig. 5) are analogous to that of the DM test.
5.6. Recalibration
An issue with many EPF studies is that forecasting models are not
recalibrated. Instead, they are often estimated once using the training
dataset and directly evaluated over the whole test dataset. This is problematic as it does not represent real-life conditions where forecasting
models are retrained (often on a daily basis) to account for the latest
market information.
To have models that are evaluated in realistic conditions, they need
to be retrained considering the new incoming flow of market information. As an example, for the day-ahead market, a forecasting model
should be retrained on a daily basis as new information is available.
Considering a testing period of a year, this means that a realistic
evaluation requires estimating the forecasting model 365 times.
5.7. Ex-ante hyperparameter optimization
A common issue in the current EPF literature is that the hyperparameter selection is often either done ex-post [49,51,139–142] or
its details are not sufficiently explained [13,21,37,48,89,92,102–104,
107,110]. As an example, when models based on neural networks are
proposed, the details on how the number of neurons are selected are
usually not provided. In other cases, while the approach is provided, it
is often based on analyzing different configurations of neurons using
the test dataset and selecting the one that works best, i.e. ex-post
hyperparameter selection.
Not providing enough details on how hyperparameters are selected
is an obvious problem as it prevents reproducing research. Similarly,
performing hyperparameter optimization ex-post leads to overfitting
the test dataset, i.e. the model is partially optimized using the same
dataset used for evaluating the model, and it grants the model an unfair
and non-existent advantage over other models.
To prevent this, the selection of hyperparameters should be explicitly explained and always performed ex-ante using a validation
18 This holds as long as the calibration window does not grow with the
sample size [138]. This is satisfied for rolling windows, but not for extended
calibration windows.
dataset. With that motivation, for the open-access methods proposed,
not only do we explain how the hyperparameters are obtained, but we
also provide within the toolbox [58,59] a module for hyperparameter
selection and the files containing the results of the hyperparameter
optimization of the current study.
5.8. Computation time
An even more common problem is the fact that new models are very
rarely compared in terms of their computational requirements [19,20,
22,24,32,37,41,42,51,100,102,103,105–108,111]. Although a model
might be marginally better than another, it might not be worthwhile
to deploy it in a practical application if its computational requirements
are much larger. Particularly, higher computational requirements might
pose two problems:
1. As mentioned before, forecasting models should ideally be recalibrated on a daily basis. Hence, a forecasting method is only
suitable if its computational time allows this recalibration to take
place. In this context, the maximum available time for estimating
a model will depend on each electricity market but, as a rule of
thumb, it can be argued that any model that requires more than
30 min or 1 h will unlikely be suitable for forecasting prices in
the spot markets.
2. Besides recalibration, the second issue with computation time
is its cost. If the computational capabilities are too large, the
benefits of using a marginally better forecast might be lower
than the cost of running the forecasting model on a much more
expensive computer.
Hence, when new forecasting models are proposed, we argue that
it is very important to provide their computation times. Moreover, we
also argue that for a model to be better than the existing methods, it
does not necessarily have to be the most accurate one. Instead:
1. If its computational time is large, i.e. in the order of minutes, the
model should indeed be more accurate than all state-of-the-art
models, e.g. DNNs.
2. If its computational time is small, i.e. in the order of seconds, the
model should be more accurate than the state-of-the-art models
with low computational requirements, e.g. LEAR.
In this article, we provide an analysis of the computational requirements of the proposed open-access models so other researchers can
easily make such comparisons.
5.9. Reproducibility
Another related issue is that some studies lack enough details to
replicate the research. Missing details vary from study to study but the
four most common are:
1. the dataset used for testing and evaluation is not defined [31–
37];
2. the dataset used for training is not defined [21,33,35,41,42];
3. the inputs of the model are unclear [35,36,38–40];
4. the selection of hyperparameters is unclear [13,21,37,48,89,92,
102–104,107,110].
To correct this, future EPF papers should provide enough details to
allow replication and reviewers should verify that all necessary details
of the employed datasets are always provided.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
5.10. Data contamination
Another recurrent issue in the EPF literature is data contamination,
which appears when a part of the training dataset is used for testing.
Particularly, when working with time series data the test dataset should
always comprise the last part of the dataset to avoid data contamination. If this is not done, the models can overfit the testing dataset and
their accuracy can be overestimated.
Despite the importance of correctly separating the training/
validation dataset from the testing dataset, some studies in EPF:
1. Do not specify the split between the training, validation, and test
datasets [21,31–37,41,42]. If the datasets are not specified, it is
not possible to know whether data contamination occurs.
2. Randomly sample the test dataset from the full dataset [143–
146], e.g. in a dataset comprising a year of data randomly
selecting 4 weeks for testing and the remaining data for training.
3. Have a partial or total overlap between the training/validation
dataset and the testing dataset [51,139,140,147], e.g. by performing hyperparameter optimization ex-post.
To correct this issue, it is important that any future research in EPF
ensures that: (1) the split between the datasets is correctly described;
(2) the test dataset does never overlap with the training or validation
datasets; (3) the test dataset is always selected as the last segment of
the full dataset.
5.11. Software toolboxes
A less pressing yet relevant issue is the use of state-of-the-art software toolboxes. When comparing new methods with methods from
the literature, the latter should be modeled using adequate toolboxes.
Particularly, it is important to use toolboxes that are continuously
updated as implementing methods using outdated libraries leads to
unfair evaluations.
For example, in the context of neural networks, there are several
open-source state-of-the-art toolboxes [126] that are continuously updated and that grant access to the latest development in the field of DL.
Yet, in the context of EPF, new methods are often compared with neural
networks that are modeled using the MATLAB toolbox [32,38,41,42,49,
102,103,105,144], a toolbox that for many years was outdated and did
not include many of the neural network developments that are critical
in EPF, e.g. state-of-the-art activation functions or stochastic gradient
descent algorithms [57]. As a result, many of the existing comparisons
in EPF are based on evaluations where the accuracy of neural networks
might be underestimated.
Besides using state-of-the-art software toolboxes, e.g. the python
library keras for deep learning, it is also important to employ (whenever possible) free-to-access libraries so that research can be replicated
by anyone.
5.12. Combining forecasts
As a final guideline, it is important to indicate the importance
of ensembles in the context of EPF. In general, although exceptions
exist [148], combining different models leads to a higher accuracy [81,
134] and it is thus a good idea to build forecasts based on multiple
models. However, as even the arithmetic average improves the accuracy of individual models, new ensemble techniques should be studied
in comparison with other ensemble techniques, i.e. as done in [134],
and not simply w.r.t. the individual models.
To maximize the forecasting accuracy, it is important to employ
diverse forecasts [148], e.g. forecasts generated using different data or
different models. For EPF, the former can be achieved by considering
models trained using different calibration window lengths [80,135]
and the latter using different modeling techniques or different sets of
hyperparameters. To further maximize the performance, the number
of models used in the ensemble should be limited [148], e.g. 4–10,
especially in the case of heavy-tailed data for which large ensembles
tend to contain outliers more often, resulting in less accurate forecasts.
With that in mind, as part of the open-access benchmark and toolbox [58,59], we also propose a series of simple ensemble techniques.
Particularly, as explained in Section 4, we provide an ensemble of four
LEAR models that are estimated over different calibration windows
and combined using a simple arithmetic average and another ensemble
using four DNNs that are estimated for different hyperparameters and
combined using the arithmetic average.
6. Evaluation of state-of-the-art methods
In this section, we present the results of the open-source benchmark
methods for all five datasets. For the sake of clarity, we divide the
section into two parts respectively comprising the results for the error
metrics and the results for statistical testing.
6.1. Accuracy metrics
We first start by presenting the results of the open-access benchmark
models in terms of accuracy metrics.
6.1.1. Individual models
Table 2 compares the performance of the two individual models
and their 4 variations in terms of rMAE, MAE, MAPE, SMAPE, and
RMSE. The LEAR model is displayed for 4 different calibration windows
representing 56, 84, 1092, and 1456 days, i.e. 8 weeks, 12 weeks,
3 years, and 4 years. The four DNNs are obtained by performing the
hyperparameter/feature optimization process four times and using the
best hyperparameter/feature selection of every run (see Sections 4.4
and 4.3.3 for further details).19 Several observations can be made:
• The MAPE seems an unreliable metric as it completely disagrees
with the other three linear metrics and the quadratic metric.
In particular, while the rMAE, MAE, and sMAPE agree on what
the best model is in all the cases, the MAPE almost never does
so. This unreliability can be further seen in the German market:
while the MAPE and sMAPE metrics usually have similar orders
of magnitude, in the case of the German market the MAPE is
approximately 10 times larger. This effect is due to prices in
Germany being negative and very close to 0, leading in turn to
very large absolute percentage errors that bias the MAPE.
• The DNN models seem to be more accurate than the LEAR models.
Particularly, in terms of linear metrics, the best model across the
five marketplaces is a DNN. Moreover, the majority of the DNN
models perform better than the four LEAR models.
• Although the RMSE displays slightly different results, this is expected as the metric is based on quadratic errors and not linear
ones. Nonetheless, it still shows the superiority of the DNN model:
even though the DNN is estimated by minimizing absolute errors
(unlike LEAR), the DNN is better in 3 of the 5 datasets. Moreover,
even though the DNN seems to be worse in two markets, the
RMSE metric does not correctly represent the underlying problem
(see Sections 5.4 and 6.4.1) and it can be argued that it is not the
best metric to assess the performance of EPF models.
19 Note that, for the sake of simplicity, the features and hyperparameter
selection for each model are not provided. However, they can be obtained
from the website [58] accompanying this study.

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Table 2
Comparison between the two individual state-of-the-art open-source methods in terms of rMAE, MAE, MAPE, sMAPE, and
RMSE. Each of the two methods is listed for four different configurations. The gray cells represent the best model for a given
metric.
DNN1
DNN2
DNN3
DNN4
LEAR56
LEAR84
LEAR1092
LEAR1456
NP
rMAE
0.435
0.512
0.414
0.455
0.475
0.472
0.482
0.481
MAE
1.797
2.118
1.712
1.883
1.964
1.952
1.993
1.990
MAPE [%]
5.738
6.527
5.584
5.814
6.336
6.357
6.099
6.144
sMAPE [%]
5.167
5.982
4.970
5.367
5.656
5.619
5.641
5.658
RMSE
3.474
3.859
3.360
3.489
3.671
3.664
3.605
3.604
PJM
rMAE
0.511
0.499
0.491
0.486
0.550
0.548
0.490
0.489
MAE
3.234
3.157
3.105
3.075
3.477
3.467
3.098
3.095
MAPE [%]
30.622
29.345
27.554
27.975
32.520
32.341
30.279
30.239
sMAPE [%]
12.518
12.212
12.271
12.004
13.677
13.576
12.331
12.538
RMSE
6.231
6.773
5.200
5.498
5.718
5.709
5.264
5.142
EPEX
rMAE
0.620
0.621
0.620
0.597
0.682
0.669
0.649
0.653
BE
MAE
6.299
6.308
6.297
6.068
6.924
6.798
6.594
6.634
MAPE [%]
24.650
27.710
27.578
25.466
32.878
32.343
26.256
22.645
sMAPE [%]
14.543
14.723
14.980
14.106
16.197
15.954
16.867
17.293
RMSE
16.360
16.666
16.115
15.950
16.371
16.291
16.458
16.420
EPEX
rMAE
0.575
0.573
0.554
0.591
0.638
0.624
0.580
0.597
FR
MAE
4.218
4.198
4.063
4.334
4.681
4.575
4.250
4.378
MAPE [%]
14.284
13.757
15.160
15.513
19.031
18.087
14.955
14.896
sMAPE [%]
12.124
11.698
11.488
12.176
13.427
13.281
13.250
14.054
RMSE
11.772
12.345
11.880
12.354
11.732
10.759
11.337
11.462
EPEX
rMAE
0.407
0.422
0.406
0.394
0.506
0.499
0.450
0.451
DE
MAE
3.716
3.850
3.706
3.592
4.619
4.555
4.108
4.118
MAPE [%]
77.145
137.449
100.214
90.578
129.763
133.580
128.295
124.191
sMAPE [%]
14.970
15.356
15.508
14.680
17.600
17.491
16.984
17.054
RMSE
6.796
7.304
6.271
6.080
8.122
7.923
6.996
6.987
Table 3
Comparison between the ensembles of the state-of-the-art open-source methods in terms of
rMAE, MAE, MAPE, sMAPE, and RMSE. The comparison also includes, for each market, the
best individual performing DNN and LEAR model in terms of rMAE and MAE, i.e. the two most
reliable metrics. The gray cells represent the best model for a given metric.
DNN Ensemble
LEAR Ensemble
Besta DNN
Best LEAR
NP
rMAE
0.407
0.420
0.414
0.472
MAE
1.683
1.738
1.717
1.952
MAPE [%]
5.384
5.533
5.584
6.357
sMAPE [%]
4.880
5.009
4.970
5.619
RMSE
3.319
3.362
3.360
3.664
PJM
rMAE
0.452
0.476
0.486
0.489
MAE
2.862
3.013
3.075
3.095
MAPE [%]
27.478
30.134
27.975
30.239
sMAPE [%]
11.331
11.980
12.004
12.538
RMSE
5.040
5.127
5.498
5.142
EPEX
rMAE
0.578
0.604
0.597
0.649
BE
MAE
5.870
6.140
6.068
6.594
MAPE [%]
24.892
20.720
25.466
26.256
sMAPE [%]
13.446
14.546
14.106
16.867
RMSE
15.966
15.974
15.950
16.458
EPEX
rMAE
0.527
0.543
0.554
0.580
FR
MAE
3.866
3.980
4.063
4.250
MAPE [%]
13.601
14.680
15.160
14.955
sMAPE [%]
10.812
11.566
11.488
13.250
RMSE
11.867
10.676
11.880
11.337
EPEX
rMAE
0.374
0.433
0.394
0.450
DE
MAE
3.413
3.955
3.592
4.108
MAPE [%]
94.434
122.412
90.578
128.295
sMAPE [%]
14.078
15.747
14.680
16.984
RMSE
5.927
7.079
6.080
6.996
aBest in terms of rMAE/MAE.
6.1.2. Ensembles
The results for the ensemble methods are listed in Table 3, which
compares the performance of the two ensemble models and the best
DNN and LEAR models in terms of the rMAE metric, i.e. arguably the
most reliable metric. From the table, several observations can be made:
• As already argued in Section 5.12, combining models usually
improves the accuracy. Particularly, the ensemble of DNNs is
better than the best individual DNN model for all five markets and
for all reliable metrics. Similarly, the ensemble of LEAR models
is better than the best individual LEAR model for all markets and
reliable metrics. The exception to this observation are the MAPE
and RMSE metrics but, as already noted, MAPE is an unreliable
metric and RMSE does not correctly represent the underlying
problem of EPF.
• As before, in terms of rMAE, the ensemble of DNNs is the most
accurate model across all markets, which again seems to suggest
that the DNN models are more accurate than the LEAR models.
6.2. Statistical testing
In this section, we present the results of the open-access benchmark
models in terms of the statistical tests. For the sake of simplicity, we

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Fig. 5. Results of the GW test with the multivariate loss differential series (16) for the eight individual models and the two ensembles. A heat map is used to indicate the range
of the obtained 𝑝-values for each of the five markets. The closer the p-values are to zero (dark green), the more significant the difference is between the forecasts of a model on
the 𝑋-axis (better) and the forecasts of a model on the 𝑌-axis (worse). Black color indicates p-values above the color map limit, i.e. p-values larger or equal than 0.10.
present together the results for individual methods and ensembles. The
results are based on the multivariate GW test using the 𝐿1 norm in (13),
i.e. with the following loss differential series:
𝛥A,B
𝑑
ℎ=1
|𝜀A
𝑑,ℎ| −
ℎ=1
|𝜀B
𝑑,ℎ|.
(16)
While squared losses could also be used, we do not consider them here
because absolute errors better represent the underlying problem in EPF,
see Section 6.4.1 for a discussion.
In Fig. 5 we display the results for the five markets. More precisely,
we use heat maps arranged as chessboards to indicate the range of the
obtained 𝑝-values. The closer they are to zero (dark green) the more
significant is the difference between the forecasts of a model on the
X-axis (better) and the forecasts of a model on the 𝑌-axis (worse). For
instance, for the EPEX-DE market the first row is green indicating that
the forecasts of LEAR56 are significantly outperformed by those of all
other models. We can observe that:
• For all markets the last column is green indicating that the forecasts of the ensemble of DNNs are statistically significantly better
than the predictions of all the other models for all 5 datasets.
The only exception is the LEAR ensemble and the NP market,
a scenario in which the difference in forecasting accuracy is not
statistically significant.
• The forecasts of LEARens are statistically significantly better than
those of all individual LEAR models. Together with the previous
observation, i.e. the superiority of the DNN ensemble, it shows
that the predictions of ensemble models usually improve upon the
forecasting accuracy of individual methods.
• In two datasets (EPEX-BE and EPEX-DE), the forecasts of all the
individual DNN methods are statistically significantly better than
those of the individual LEAR models. In the EPEX-FR dataset,
the forecasts of all the individual DNN methods are statistically
significantly better than 3 out of the 4 individual LEAR models.
For PJM, there are 2 DNN models whose forecasts are statistically
significantly better than those of all LEAR models.
• Aside from the poor-performing DNN2 model for the NP dataset,
the forecasts of the individual LEAR models are never significantly better than those of the individual DNN models. Overall,
it seems that forecasts based on DNNs are more likely to obtain
significantly better results; this is particularly true for the DNN
ensemble.
6.3. Computation time
As described in Section 5.8, besides comparing the predictive accuracy, it is also necessary to analyze the computation time of the
forecasting methods. Table 4 lists a comparison of the computation time
required for estimating the models considered, i.e. the time required to
recalibrate each model on a daily basis. As the computation time is nondeterministic, its value is given as a range. These data were obtained
using a regular laptop quadcore CPU, i.e. the i7-6920HQ.
As can be observed, although the LEAR model performs slightly
worse than the DNN model, its computation time is 30 to 100 times
lower; particularly, when considering the maximum computation time
of both methods, the LEAR model is 50 times faster.
6.4. Discussion and remarks
In this section, we provide some final remarks behind the motivation of the metrics employed, we briefly analyze the influence of the
different metrics considered, and provide a discussion on comparing
new models.
6.4.1. Absolute vs. squared errors
Throughout the text, we have mostly considered accuracy metrics
based on absolute/linear errors, i.e. metrics that evaluate the accuracy
of predicting the median of the distribution. Since the LEAR model is
estimated by minimizing squared errors, thus leading to forecasts of the
mean [129], one could argue that a metric/test based on squared errors
should be preferred. While the argument has some merits, we focused
on absolute metrics for three reasons:

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
Table 4
Computation time that each benchmark model requires to perform a daily recalibration.
Time
LEAR
1–10 s
LEAR ensemble
20–25 s
DNN
2–5 min
DNN ensemble
8–20 min
1. The metric used to evaluate the accuracy should be the one
that better represents the underlying problem. In the case of
EPF, since the cost of purchasing electricity is linear, linear
metrics are arguably the best to quantify the risk associated with
forecasting errors.
2. While we provided the RMSE results, they are qualitatively
the same as for MAE/rMAE. Hence, as absolute errors better
represent the underlying problem of EPF and the results are
similar, the RMSE results are not analyzed here in detail due to
space limitations.
3. While the LEAR model is indeed estimated using squared errors,
this is partly done because the techniques to efficiently estimate
the LASSO, e.g. coordinate descent, are based on square errors.
This gives the LEAR model a computational advantage over
the DNN. An alternative would be to use regularized quantile
regression [149] leading, however, to an increased computational burden with little benefits on the accuracy in terms of
MAE/rMAE.
6.4.2. Metrics
The obtained results validate the general guidelines proposed in
Section 5.4 regarding accuracy metrics: research in EPF should avoid
MAPE and only use metrics like sMAPE or RMSE in conjunction with
any version of rMAE. Particularly, the results validate the following
four claims:
1. MAE is as reliable as rMAE. However, as the errors are not
relative, comparison between datasets is not possible and rMAE
is preferred.
2. sMAPE is more reliable than MAPE and it agrees with MAE/rMAE.
Yet, it has the problem of an undefined mean and an infinite
variance. Thus, it is less reliable than rMAE.
3. MAPE is not a reliable metric as it gives more importance
to datapoints close to zero. As such, using MAPE can lead to
misleading results and wrong conclusions.
4. RMSE is more reliable than MAPE but it does not represent
correctly the underlying risks of EPF. Hence, it should not be
used alone to evaluate forecasting models.
6.4.3. Performance of open-access models
Based on the extensive comparison of Sections 6.1–6.3, it can be
concluded that the models based on DL are more likely to outperform
those based on statistical methods. This is especially true in the context
of DL ensemble models as the ensemble of DNNs obtains results that are
statistically significantly better than any other model.
However, while DNNs outperformed the LEAR models, the latter are
still the state-of-the-art in terms of low complexity and computational
cost. In particular, their performance is very close to that of DNNs, but
with the advantage of having computational costs that are up to 100
times lower. As such, they are the best available option when decision
making has to be done within seconds.
In short, new models for EPF should either be compared against
LEAR models or DNNs depending on the decision time that is available.
For a method to be considered more accurate than state-of-the-art
methods, it should either be more accurate than the DNN model, or
more accurate than LEAR but with similar or lower computational
requirements.
7. Checklist to ensure adequate EPF research
As a final contribution, and with the goal of facilitating the work
of reviewers of future EPF publications, we provide a short checklist to
evaluate whether any new research in EPF satisfies the requirements to
be reproducible and lead to meaningful conclusions:
1. The test dataset comprises at least a year of data.
2. Any new model is tested against state-of-the-art open-access
models, e.g. the ones provided here.
3. The computational cost of new methods is evaluated and compared against the computational cost of existing methods.
4. The employed datasets are open-access.
5. The study is based on multiple markets.
6. rMAE is employed as one of the accuracy metrics to evaluate
forecasting accuracy.
7. Statistical testing is used to assess whether differences in performance are significant.
8. Forecasting models are recalibrated on a daily basis and not
simply estimated once and evaluated in the full out-of-sample
dataset.
9. Hyperparameters are estimated using a validation dataset that is
different from the test dataset.
10. The split and dates of the dataset are explicitly stated.
11. All the inputs of the model are explicitly defined.
12. The test dataset is selected as the last section of the full dataset
and does not contain any overlapping data with the training or
validation datasets.
13. State-of-the-art and free toolboxes are used for modeling the
benchmark models.
While this is just a very short summary of the guidelines described in
Section 5, we think it is very useful to have them summarized together
for quick evaluations of new research.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we have derived a set of best practices for performing
research in electricity price forecasting (EPF). Particularly, as the field
of EPF lacks a rigorous approach to compare and to evaluate new
forecasting models, we have analyzed different factors affecting the
quality of the research, e.g. dataset size or accuracy metrics, and
we have proposed solutions to ensure that new research is adequate,
reproducible, and useful.
In addition, as comparisons in EPF are often done using unique
datasets that no other researchers have access to, we have proposed an
extensive open-access benchmark dataset comprising 6 years of recent
data in 5 different markets. The aim of the benchmark dataset is to
provide a common framework for future research so that new methods
can be validated under the same conditions and meaningful comparisons can be obtained. To facilitate future research, we have developed
an open-source python library named epftoolbox [58,59] that
provides easy access to these datasets.
Similarly, as new methods in EPF are often not compared with
well-established methods, we have proposed several state-of-the-art
open-source models based on statistical methods and deep learning.
The methods are tuned automatically and require no expert knowledge
in order to be used. These methods are provided as open-source within
the proposed epftoolbox library [58,59] so that other researchers
can employ them as benchmarks in their own studies. Although the
proposed methods are currently developed in python, we would like
to extend the support to other languages; in that spirit, we encourage
other researchers to help us do so.
Finally, to have a complete open-access benchmark, we have evaluated the two proposed open-access methods in the open-access dataset
and we have provided the results in terms of accuracy metrics and

Applied Energy 293 (2021) 116983
J. Lago et al.
statistical testing. Using these results, we have shown that deep neural
networks are more likely to outperform LEAR methods but that the
latter are the best model for applications with short decision timeframes. Moreover, we have also shown that ensemble methods often
obtain significantly better results than their individual counterparts.
Based on the same results, we have also showed the importance of
the guidelines as to what constitutes good practices for the rigorous
use of models, metrics, and statistical tests in EPF research. The most
notable guidelines were that MAPE is an unreliable metric that should
be avoided, that statistical testing is mandatory to obtain meaningful
conclusions, and that the length of the test dataset should be at least
one year.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jesus Lago: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing -
original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Project administration. Grzegorz Marcjasz: Methodology, Resources, Validation,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Bart De Schutter: Supervision, Writing
- review & editing, Funding acquisition. Rafał Weron: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Writing - review & editing,
Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
research
and
innovation
program
under
the
Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 675318 (INCITE), the Ministry
of Science and Higher Education (MNiSW, Poland) through grant No.
0219/DIA/2019/48 and the National Science Center (NCN, Poland)
through grant No. 2018/30/A/HS4/00444.