1. Introduction
Energy is an important material basis for the survival and development of human society. In recent years, the global energy demand has been growing strongly, the mismatch between energy
supply and demand is becoming increasingly tense, and fossil energy is exhausted day by day. The energy problem has become a
severe challenge faced by all countries around the world, which
are dealing with the energy crisis and environmental pollution.
To solve the common threat faced by all countries in the world,
a good number of research has been carried out on the sustainable energy system from two aspects of broadening the sources
of energy and reducing the consumption/cost of energy. Broadening the sources of energy is a way of seeking more available
energy to maintain the sustainable supply of energy. Besides fossil energy and water energy in the traditional sense, solar energy,
wind energy, biomass energy, marine energy, geothermal energy,
etc. are highly attractive because of their cleanness and renewability. Reducing the consumption/cost of energy aims to reduce energy waste to the maximum extent, striving to delay the depletion of fossil fuels and reduce environmental pollution by improving the energy utilization rate.
In addition, in the process of social development and progress,
energy systems such as oil, gas, electric power and thermal energy
are often planned and operated independently for various reasons,
and lack of coordination among them. The resulting problems such
as low energy utilization rate and low ﬂexibility and reliability of
the energy system also need to be solved urgently. At present, the
sustainable energy and electric systems are formed by the close
coupling of power system, gas system, thermal system and other
energy systems, and gradually evolved into an integrated energy
system with electric power as the core ( Jin, et al., 2016 ; Zeng, Fang,
Li, & Chen, 2016 ). In this context, several important forms of energy utilization have emerged, such as smart grid (containing microgrid), integrated energy system (IES) and energy internet (EI).
Their aims are to build sustainable energy and electric systems
through both broadening the sources of energy and reducing the
consumption/cost of energy, so as to alleviate the energy crisis and
reduce environmental pollution. Power grid is an important part of
the energy industry chain and is the hub of energy transmission,
especially electric power transmission, which has the functions of
optimizing the energy resource allocation mode and improving the
energy resource allocation eﬃciency. The interconnection of power
grids and the integration of power, gas, thermal energy and other
multi energy sources will form the center of the future sustainable
energy system. Renewable energy technology, distributed generation technology, integrated energy utilization technology and energy management technology are developing rapidly in sustainable
energy and electric systems. They provide important support for
optimizing energy supply structure and improving energy utilization eﬃciency.
With the integration of intermittent renewable energy and
large-scale regional interconnection of energy systems, sustainable
energy and electric systems have evolved into highly dimensional
dynamic large-scale systems. Moreover, the randomness of users’
energy consumption behaviours and the ﬂexible use of active loads
(such as electric vehicles) also increase the complexity and uncertainty of energy systems. The sustainable energy and electric systems are in real-time dynamic change, and the research of related
problems is nonlinear and uncertain. The primary issue for its research is that it is diﬃcult to establish accurate mathematical models in most cases or to describe it simply by mathematical models
( Yang, Zhao, & Wang, 2019 ).
As an important branch of artiﬁcial intelligence and especially machine learning, reinforcement learning (RL) has the advantage of self-learning by interactive trial and error with a dynamic environment and has been used to solve a variety of realistic control decision-making issues in the presence of uncertainty ( Rocchetta, Bellani, Compare, Zio, & Patelli, 2019 ). In intelligent robots, game competitions, industrial manufacturing and
other ﬁelds, it has shown gratifying application results ( Khan, Herrmann, Lewis, Pipe, & Melhuish, 2012 ; Mnih, et al., 2015 ; Shin, Ryu,
& Jung, 2012 ). RL can learn self-improvement by judging the reward feedback generated by its own experience, so as to learn the
optimal policy to achieve the goal ( Khan, et al., 2012 ). It does not
require a model of the system dynamics and is not sensitive to
the physical model of the study object. Therefore, RL is an extremely valuable tool to make (near-) optimal decisions for nonlinear uncertain systems, in cases when the dynamics are either
unknown or affected by signiﬁcant uncertainty ( Bu ¸s oniu, de Bruin,

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 1. The interaction between the agent and the environment (adopted from
Sutton & Barto, 2018 ).
Toli ´c, Kober, & Palunko, 2018 ). This characteristic of RL makes it
very suitable for sustainable energy and electric systems with complex nonlinearity and uncertainty. The applications of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems will effectively improve the
economy, ﬂexibility and reliability of the systems and promote the
energy revolution.
In a recent review ( Glavic, 2019 ) of (D)RL for electric power system control, the author conducted a comprehensive study on (D)RL
for solving power system control and related problems, which offers a good reference for researchers interested in this ﬁeld. It focuses on power system control, but system decisions making (like
energy scheduling and market decisions) are not included. Differently, our paper reviews the applications of (D)RL in energy and
electric systems, and provides a comprehensive study on (D)RL for
decision-making and control problems. Towards building sustainable energy and electric systems, how to reduce the consumption/cost of energy is also an important aspect. Therefore, for different stakeholders, we give a detailed review of the system operation optimization (i.e. energy management of the energy supply
side, the user side and the whole system). In addition, the applications of RL in electric vehicle management is also introduced.
This paper describes RL, the supporting role of RL in sustainable
energy and electric systems and the applications of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems, in order to provide useful reference for the development of intelligent energy. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical basis of classical RL. Section 3 introduces deep RL (DRL)
and some popular DRL algorithms. The supporting role of RL in
sustainable energy and electric systems is discussed in Section 4 .
Then, Section 5 summarizes the applications of RL in sustainable
energy and electric systems from six aspects. Section 6 describes
the challenges and prospects of the applications.
2. Classical reinforcement learning
The core of RL is to learn the dynamic interaction between
the agent and the environment where the agent operates. If an
agent’s action causes the environment to give a positive reward,
the agent’s subsequent tendency to execute this action will be reinforced. As shown in Fig. 1 , the interaction process between the
agent and environment can be represented by the closed loop
( Sutton & Barto, 2018 ). The paradigm of RL is very similar to the
process of human learning knowledge, which is why RL is regarded
as an important way to realize general artiﬁcial intelligence. The
goal of RL is to ﬁnd the optimal policy in each state to maximize
the long-term reward (discounted). Therefore, RL can learn selfimprovement only by judging the feedback from its own experience in the environment, which has a stronger self-learning ability
than other machine learning methods.
2.1. Markov decision process
The classical research of RL is based on Markov decision processes (MDPs) ( Sutton & Barto, 2018 ), that is, the next state of the
system only depends on the current state and action. An MDP is
deﬁned as a tuple < S, A, T, r > , where: S is the state space, A is the
action space, T: S × A × S → [0,1] is the state transition probability
function which represents the probability of transiting from one
state to another after executing an action in that state, r: S × A → r
is the reward function which represents the immediate reward received by the agent after it performs the transition.
The agent observes the current state s ∈ S and chooses an action
a ∈ A ( s ), where A ( s ) is the set of all admissible actions in state s .
The system evolves probabilistically to the next state s’ ∈ S according to the transition probability function T ( s, a, s’ ). The agent then
receives reward r ( s, a ) for the transition. This process can go on
indeﬁnitely or end at the terminate state. The policy π is a mapping from a state to an action: S × A → [0,1]. The agent’s goal is to
maximize its (discounted) cumulative reward over the time by adjusting the policy. Generally, two kinds of value functions can be
used to measure the quality of a policy π, that is, the state value
function V π ( s ) and the state-action value function Q π ( s, a ). Given a
policy π, the state value function is deﬁned as follows:
V π(s ) = E π
t=0
γ t r t | s 0 = s
(1)
where E π [ • ] is the expectation under policy π, s 0 is the initial
state, t is the index of time step, r t is the reward at time step t ,
and the parameter γ ∈ [0,1] is the discount factor used to reduce
the effect of future reward while keeping the cumulative reward
over inﬁnite horizon bounded.
The state-action value function is deﬁned as follows:
Q π(s, a ) = E π
t=0
γ t r t | s 0 = s, a 0 = a
(2)
where a 0 is the initial action. Since the optimal policy π ∗is the
policy which maximizes the value function, the optimal policy of
each value function can be obtained according to the following two
equations:
π ∗= arg max
π
V π(s )
(3)
π ∗= arg max
a ∈ A Q π(s, a )
(4)
2.2. Temporal difference
In Section 2.1 , the MDP is deﬁned as a tuple < S, A, T, r > . According to whether the state transition probability T is known or
not, RL methods can be divided into model-based RL methods and
model-free RL methods. Model-based methods rely on planning as
their primary component, while model-free methods primarily rely
on learning. The model-based RL can be solved by dynamic programming (DP) while model-free RL can be solved by Monte Carlo
(MC) and temporal difference (TD) methods ( Sutton & Barto, 2018 ).
The implementation of DP needs a complete environment model;
while MC method can be used without a model, but it uses experience to evaluate the value function and must wait until the end
of the episode to exploit the return, so the learning speed is slow
and it is diﬃcult to realize online. The TD method, which combines DP and MC methods, is a model-free RL method and can
be realized online through step-by-step incremental computation
( Sutton, 1988 ).
TD method is one of the most popular RL schemes. Among TD
methods, the most classic is Q-learning proposed by Watkins in
his doctoral thesis in 1989 ( Watkins, 1989 ). The main idea of the
algorithm is to deﬁne Q-functions and substitute the data observed
online into the following updating formula to learn the Q-functions
iteratively and get the exact solution:
Q t+1 ( s t , a t ) = Q t ( s t , a t ) + αt δt
(5)

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
δt = r t+1 + γ max
a ′ Q t
s t+1 , a ′ 
−Q t ( s t , a t )
(6)
where a t is the learning rate, δt is the TD error, a’ is the action
that can be taken in state s t + 1 . Q-learning is an off-policy learning
algorithm.
Another RL algorithm similar to Q-learning is SARSA (StateAction-Reward-State-Action) proposed by Rummery and Niranjan (1994) . Different from Q-learning, SARSA is an on-policy TD
method which updates Q-function directly with online actions. Its
TD error is deﬁned as
δt = r t+1 + γ Q t ( s t+1 , a t+1 ) −Q t ( s t , a t )
(7)
It can be seen from Eq. (7) that SARSA needs to use the ﬁve
parts ( s t , a t , r t + 1 , s t + 1 , a t + 1 ) when updating Q-function, which constitute the name SARSA of the algorithm. Under certain conditions,
SARSA can obtain the optimal control policy when time tends to
inﬁnity ( S. Singh, Jaakkola, Littman, & Szepesvári, 20 0 0 ).
Both Q-learning and SARSA use TD error to update the value
function, which belong to TD learning ( Sutton, 1988 ). This involves
temporal credit assignment, that is, how much TD error should be
assigned to the actions at different times to update the value function. So Sutton (1988) proposed TD( λ) algorithm to solve the problem of temporal credit assignment:
Q t+1 ( s t , a t ) = Q t ( s t , a t ) + αδt e t ( s t )
(8)
where e t ( s ) is the eligibility trace, deﬁned as
e t (s ) =
γ λe t (s ) + 1 ,
s = s t
γ λe t (s ) ,
else
(9)
TD ( λ) establishes a uniﬁed framework of MC and TD learning.
When λ takes different values from 0 to 1, TD( λ) can be converted
into different methods. When λ is 1, TD( λ) is MC, while when λ is
0, TD( λ) is TD learning.
2.3. Policy gradient learning
The RL methods introduced above are all value-function-based
algorithms, which need to ﬁnd out the value function ﬁrst and
then improve the current policy based on the value function. Another kind is policy-based methods, such as policy gradient algorithms ( Degris, Pilarski, & Sutton, 2012 ; Williams, 1992 ). Policy gradient algorithms are methods using approximators to approximate
and optimize policy so as to ﬁnd the optimal policy. These methods can be divided into deterministic policy gradient (DPG) algorithm and stochastic policy gradient (SPG) algorithm. In DPG algorithm, action is executed with probability 1, while in SPG algorithm, action is executed with a certain probability.
Silver, et al. (2014) proposed an effective DPG estimation
method. Compared with SPG, the DPG has better performance in
high-dimensional action space. Suppose the policy that needs to
be approximated is π( s, a; θ) and the policy is derivable with parameter θ. Then the objective function and value function can be
deﬁned as
J ( πθ ) = E
t=1
γ t−1 r t | s 0 , πθ
(10)
Q πθ (s, a ) = E
k =1
γ k −1 r t+ k | s t = s, a t = a, πθ
(11)
Suppose that starting from the initial state s 0 , the state distribution of the action is selected according to the policy πθ as
d πθ (s ) =
t=1
γ t P ( s t = s | s 0 , πθ )
(12)
Then we can derive the following policy gradient theorem( Sutton, McAllester, Singh, & Mansour, 20 0 0 ):
∇ θJ ( πθ ) =
s
d πθ (s )
a
∇ θπθ(s, a ) Q πθ (s, a )
(13)
From the above formula, it can be seen that although the state
distribution d ( s ) is related to the policy πθ , ▽ θJ( πθ) has no relation with ∇ θd πθ (s ) . Therefore, the change of policy will change the
sample distribution, but the change of sample distribution will not
affect the update of the policy. After obtaining the policy gradient,
methods such as gradient ascent can be used to maximize the objective function.
The previous contents introduce value-function-based RL methods and policy-based RL methods. Barto, Sutton, and Anderson (1983) combined the advantages of value-function-based
methods and policy-based methods for the ﬁrst time and proposed
Actor-Critic RL. Actor-Critic is composed of an actor network (policy) and a critic network (value function). The actor network de-
ﬁnes parameterized policies and outputs actions to the environment based on the observed state of the environment and the
critic network outputs the value function based on the state and
the return from the environment. The TD error generated by critic
network drives the operation of the whole network.
2.4. Multi-agent reinforcement learning
In the previous introduction, we mainly discuss the RL methods for single-agent cases. In practice, in a variety of domains,
there are situations where multiple agents need to work together,
e.g. robotic teams, distributed control, cooperative driving of multiple vehicles and resource management. In these cases, RL methods for multi-agent systems are designed. For example, in resource
management, while resources can be managed by a centralized
approach, deﬁning each resource with an agent and using a distributed control strategy may provide a helpful and distributed
perspective on the system.
A multi-agent system consists of a group of autonomous, interacting agents sharing a common environment, and has a good
degree of scalability ( Bu, Babu, & De Schutter, 2008 ). The multiple agents in the system can interact with each other in perfectly
competitive, hybrid strategic, or completely cooperative settings.
3. Deep reinforcement learning
Although classical RL methods have achieved great success in
ﬁelds of natural science and engineering, many methods are aimed
at discrete states and actions. However, in many practical applications, the quantity of states (and actions) is large, even continuous state (and action) spaces. At this time, classical RL methods
are diﬃcult to learn effectively. As a result, the classical RL methods suffer from the “curse of dimensionality” problem. Therefore,
researchers try to overcome this problem from different perspectives, among which function approximation is the most direct solution by using a function to approximate the value function and/or
the policy.
In recent years, deep learning (DL), which has made great
progress, has been used to approximate arbitrary complex functions. Due to the excellent properties of adaptability, advanced
input-output mapping and nonlinearity, DL is frequently used for
universal function approximation in numerical algorithms. The
combination of DL function approximators with RL into DRL is
tempting, especially for domains such as resource management
and robotics where it can enable learning behaviors directly from
raw states through trial and error and achieves end-to-end learning. Mnih, et al. (2013) introduced a new DL model for Q-learning,
and demonstrated its ability to master diﬃcult control policies

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 2. The schematic diagram of the DQN training process (adopted from Liu, Gao
& Luo, (Liu et al., 2019) ).
for Atari 2600 computer games. In 2019, University of California,
Berkeley and Google Brain enabled quadruped robots to learn to
walk like human beings through DRL. The above research shows
that DRL has good performance in dealing with decision-making
problems with continuous state space.
3.1. Deep learning
The concept of DL originates from the research and development of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). A multilayer perceptron
with multiple hidden layers is a typical DL structure, where the
ﬁrst several hidden layers can automatically construct new features
from the data in an unsupervised way, and then extract more abstract high-level category attributes layer by layer so as to discover
the deep feature representation of the data.
Similar to traditional machine learning methods, DL can
be divided into supervised learning and unsupervised learning
( LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015 ). For instance, convolutional neural network (CNN) ( Hu, Lu, Li, & Chen, 2014 ) is a kind of machine
learning model under deep supervised learning, while deep belief
net (DBN) ( Hinton, Osindero, & Teh, 2006 ), stacked auto-encoder
(SAE) ( Jiao, Huang, Ma, Han, & Tian, 2018 ) and restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) ( Hinton, 2012 ) are machine learning models
under unsupervised learning.
DRL which uses DL to approximate the value function is called
value-function-based DRL while DRL which uses DL to approximate
the policy and solved by policy gradient methods is called policybased DRL ( Arulkumaran, Deisenroth, Brundage, & Bharath, 2017 ).
We will summarize them separately in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3 .
3.2. Value-function-based DRL
Q-learning is a classical RL algorithm of learning value function.
Next, we will focus on Deep Q-network (DQN), the originator of
DRL, and various extension methods of DQN.
3.2.1. Deep Q-network
Deepmind proposed the DQN model in 2013 ( Mnih, et al.,
2013 ), a pioneering work in DRL, which trained CNN with a variant
of Q learning. Then they added a target network to improve the
learning performance of DQN ( Mnih, et al., 2015 ). Before the appearance of DQN, when using neural networks to approximate the
value function in RL, there will be problems of instability or even
non-convergence. To solve these problems, DQN uses two technologies: experience replay mechanism and target network. The
schematic diagram of the DQN training process is shown in Fig. 2 .
Experience replay mechanism : In supervised learning with
great progress in DL, all the samples are independently and identically distributed. However, the samples in RL are highly correlated
and non-stationary, resulting in slow training convergence. The experience replay mechanism stores the agent’s experience e t = ( s t ,
a t , r t , s t + 1 ) at each time step and forms a replay memory sequence
D = { e 1 , …, e N }. During the training, a small batch of experience
samples is randomly extracted from D each time, and the network
parameters are updated by using the stochastic gradient descent
algorithm. The experience replay mechanism breaks the correlations between the samples by randomly sampling historical data,
while the reuse of experiences increases the eﬃciency of data usage.
Target Network : In order to make the performance of the DQN
algorithm more stable, two neural networks with the same structure are established: the network Q-network which keeps updating
the parameters of the neural network and the target Q-network
which is used to update the Q-value. DQN uses deep neural network (Q-network) with parameters θ to estimate the action-value
function, expressed as Q ( s,a; θ) ≈Q π ( s,a ). During the training process of the Q-network, the parameters are updated by minimizing
the following loss functions:
L t ( θt ) = E ( s,a,r,s ′ )
( y −Q ( s, a ;θt ) )
(14)
where the optimization target value y of Q-network is:
y = r + γ max
a ′ Q 
s ′ , a ′ ;θ −
t
(15)
where θ−t are the parameters of the target network. Differentiating the loss function with respect to the weights we arrive at the
following gradient:
∇ θt L t ( θt ) = E ( s,a,r,s ′ )
( y −Q ( s, a ;θt ) ) ∇ θt Q ( s, a ;θt )

(16)
The structure of the target Q-network is the same as that of the
Q-network, while the parameters θ−t of the target Q-network are
updated with the parameters θ t every N iterations and are kept
ﬁxed in each time period.
3.2.2. Extension algorithms of DQN
Since DQN was proposed, various extended versions of DQN
have emerged. According to the different emphasis of the extensions, the extensions mainly include the improvement of the training algorithm, the improvement of the neural network structure
and the improvement of the learning mechanism. Following we
will introduce typical algorithms of these extensions.
3.2.3. Double DQN (DDQN)
In Q-learning and DQN algorithms, the parameters are updated
as
θt+1 = θt + α
y Q
t −Q ( s t , a t ;θt )
∇ θt Q ( s t , a t ;θt )
(17)
where the optimization target value is:
y Q
t = r t+1 + γ Q

s t+1 , arg max
a Q ( s t+1 , a ;θt ) ;θt

(18)
From Eq. (18) , it can be seen that DQN uses the same parameters θ t to select and evaluate an action, which makes it more likely
to overestimate the Q-value.
DDQN ( van Hasselt, Guez, & Silver, 2016 ) uses double Qlearning ( van Hasselt, 2010 ) for reference to modify DQN algorithm. It uses the online Q-network to select an action and uses
the target network to estimate the Q-value, which makes the optimization target value:
y DD QN
t
= r t+1 + γ Q

s t+1 , arg max
a Q ( s t+1 , a ;θt ) ;θ −
t

(19)
where θ t are the parameters of the online network, θ−t are the
parameters of the target network.

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
3.2.4. Dueling DQN
The traditional DQN architecture consists of input layer, convolution layers (or recurrent layers) ( Glavic, 2019 ), fully connected
layers and output layer. Z. Wang, Schaul, et al. (2016) proposed
a new neural network architecture for mode-free RL: dueling architecture. It divides the abstract features extracted from convolution layers into two streams in the fully connected layer: one
stream represents the scalar state value function V ( s ), and the
other stream represents the action advantage function A ( s,a ) in a
certain state. Finally, the two streams are combined via a special
aggregating layer to produce an estimate of the state-action value
function. The advantage of this design is to generalize learning
across actions without imposing any change to the underlying RL
algorithm.
In Dueling DQN, the constructed Q-function is as follows:
Q(s, a ;θ, α, β) = V (s ;θ, β) + A (s, a ;θ, α)
(20)
where α and β are the parameters of the two streams respectively,
and θ are the parameters of DQN.
3.2.5. Prioritized replay DQN
DQN and DDQN mentioned above both remember and reuse
past experiences through an experience replay mechanism, and
sample transitions from the replay memory. However, these methods use the same frequency to replay the previously experienced
transition ( s t , a t , r t , s t + 1 ), and do not consider the importance of
each transition.
Based on this, Schaul, Quan, Antonoglou, and Silver (2016) proposed prioritized experience replay to replay important transitions
more frequently, so that the agent can learn more effectively from
some transitions than from others. The importance of experience
transitions is measured by TD error. The samples with larger absolute value of TD error are more likely to be sampled for training.
3.3. Policy-based DRL
Policy-based DRL methods mainly include deep DPG (DDPG),
trust region policy optimization (TRPO), asynchronous advantage
Actor-Critic (A3C), and so on.
3.3.1. DDPG
DQN can only deal with tasks with discrete and lowdimensional action spaces, but in many cases, especially physical control tasks, the action spaces are continuous and highdimensional. An effective way to apply DRL methods such as DQN
to a continuous domain is to discretize the action space, but it will
bring a signiﬁcant problem of curse of dimensionality: the number of actions increases exponentially with the increase of degree
of freedom, which will bring great diﬃculties to training. In addition, simply discretizing the action space will unnecessarily remove
information of the action domain. Lillicrap, et al. (2015) applied
the idea of DQN to a continuous action domain, and proposed a
model-free algorithm DDPG based on DPG and Actor-Critic.
DDPG uses two independent networks to approximate critic
(value) function ( θ Q ) and actor (policy) function ( θπ ), and each
network has its own target network θ Q ′ and θπ′ . θ Q ′ and θπ′ are
updated in soft-update techniques to further increase the stability
of the learning process:
θ Q ′ ← τθ Q + ( 1 −τ ) θ Q ′
(21)
θπ′ ← τθπ + ( 1 −τ ) θπ′
(22)
3.3.2. TRPO
While DDPG is an off-policy DRL technique, Schulman, Levine,
Abbeel, Jordan, and Moritz (2015) put forward a policy optimization algorithm, trust region policy optimization (TRPO), with guaranteed monotonic improvement. The problem TRPO trying to solve
is to choose the appropriate step size by introducing the trust region constraint deﬁned by Kullback-Leibler divergence, so as to ensure that the optimization policy produces a result never getting
worse than the previous ones. To perform the optimization, a linear approximation is made to the objective and a quadratic approximation is made to the constraint. Then the conjugate gradient
algorithm is used to calculate the next parameter vector followed
by a line search.
3.3.3. A3C
Mnih, et al. (2016) proposed a lightweight framework for DRL
that used asynchronous gradient descent for optimization of DL
controllers, which used parallel actor-learners to update a global
shared model. The framework is combined with four standard
RL algorithms (one-step SARSA, one-step Q-learning, n -step Qlearning, and advantage Actor-Critic) to form their own asynchronous variants. First, it uses multiple CPU threads on a single machine, which removes the communication costs of sending gradients and parameters and enables use of a lock-free style
( Recht, Re, Wright, & Niu, 2011 ) for training. Then parallel multiple
actor-learners are adopted to explore different parts of the environment, and different exploration policies can be adopted in each
actor-learner to maximize the diversity. By running different exploration policies in different threads, different actor-learners update
online parallel parameters, which reduces the correlation of data
in time. Therefore, a stable learning process can be achieved without an experience replay mechanism. A3C operates in the forward
view and uses the same mix of n -step returns to update both the
policy and the value-function. The policy and the value function
are updated after every t max actions or when the terminal state is
reached.
In addition, popular policy-based DRL methods also include
proximal policy optimization (PPO) ( Schulman, Wolski, Dhariwal,
Radford, & Klimov, 2017 ), Actor Critic with experience replay
(ACER) (Z. Wang, Bapst, et al., 2016 ) and so on, which are not covered in this section considering the length of the paper.
4. The supporting role of RL in sustainable energy and electric
systems
In the process of the evolution of a power system, which is
the core part of sustainable energy and electric systems, to smart
grid, EI and IES, it has become a highly-dimensional system with
complex structure, various equipment and complex technologies,
which has complex nonlinearity and uncertainty. In addition, the
further integration of renewable energy makes sustainable energy
and electric systems increasingly complex. There are two main
reasons: on the one hand, the output of renewable energy has
strong spatio-temporal uncertainty, which makes the system operation far more complex; on the other hand, the grid connection, transmission and accommodation of renewable energy introduce more power electronic devices into the system, which will
cause the reduction of system inertia and change of its stabilization mechanism. In respect of energy consumption, the emerging loads are increasingly implicated in the development of the
load. For example, the short-term peak power consumption caused
by the spatio-temporal uncertainty of electric vehicle charging demand is extremely prominent. In sustainable energy and electric
systems, the various forms of energy production, the interactivity and uncertainty of energy consumption patterns are integrated,

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 3. The supporting role of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems.
which make the system become a multi-objective function constrained by balance. The factors of the system are numerous, the
conditions are stochastic, and it is diﬃcult to physically model.
The traditional methods of physical modeling or engineering experience have become inadequate. There are still many scientiﬁc
challenges and technical problems in building eﬃcient sustainable
energy and electric systems and supporting multi-energy coordination, optimization and complementarity. RL does not need the
model of system dynamics. It can transform the performance index
of the system into an evaluation index and learns through reward
feedback, which will effectively solve various challenges faced by
sustainable energy and electric systems.
Besides, in order to ensure the stable, economic and reliable operation and optimal management of the system, more and more
intelligent electronic devices are connected to the energy system,
forming a large amount of data resources with wide types and
high volumes. Big data drives the sustainable energy and electric
systems into a digital era. Massive data provides available environmental state information for the application of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems. These are expected to beneﬁt the
"end-to-end" energy management in sustainable energy and electric systems, and also help users transition from a passive to an
active role.
Therefore, RL is an important strategic support for energy transformation and development and building sustainable energy and
electric systems. Under the pattern of profound evolution of energy structure, the deep integration of RL and sustainable energy
and electric systems will effectively improve the ability to control complex energy systems and improve the reliability and economy of system operation. Fig. 3 shows the relationship among
sustainable energy and electric systems, system data resources,
RL and the applications of RL in various aspects in the system.
Based on the environmental data, operational data (for example:
energy consumption information), basic data (for example: user
information), and economic data in sustainable energy and electric systems, various system applications can be realized with the
help of RL technologies such as classical RL methods and DRL
methods.
5. Applications of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems
5.1. Applications of RL in operation optimization of sustainable
energy and electric systems
Integration of renewable energy generation units and new
power electronic devices, randomness of users’ energy consumption behaviors and the increase of active loads represented by electric vehicles inject more uncertainty into sustainable energy and
electric systems, which makes the optimization of system operation more complex and diﬃcult.
1. Due to the access by various new devices, the network structure of the energy system and the operation mode of each part
are ﬂexible and changeable, which means its operation problems have higher requirements for ﬂexibility.
2. The
interaction
between
the
demand
side
and
the
power/energy grid signiﬁcantly enhances the system uncertainties, which adds new diﬃculties to the optimal operation of
the system.
3. The investors in sustainable energy and electric systems will
be diversiﬁed in the future, which may be the government or
users themselves, or the independent energy service provider
and their combination. The uncertainty of investors will lead
to more complexity and changeability in the operation mode,
which makes it diﬃcult to accurately consider the operation
economy of the system.
4. In order to optimize the system operation, besides the traditional economy and reliability objectives, the optimal operation
of sustainable energy and electric systems should also consider
other operational objectives such as improving the eﬃciency
of comprehensive energy utilization, minimizing the environmental pollution and maximizing social beneﬁts. Many of these
factors are related to social, economic, policy and human constraints which are diﬃcult to quantify. Fig. 4 shows the coupling of key factors to be considered when formulating optimal
operation strategies for sustainable energy and electric systems.
Therefore, the operation optimization of sustainable energy and
electric systems forms a non-linear and uncertain optimization
problem with multi-dimensional variables, multi-objectives and

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 4. Key factors to be considered in operation optimization of sustainable energy and electric systems.
Table 1
Summary of applications of RL in operation optimization of sustainable energy and electric systems.
Classiﬁcation
Energy system/ device
Learning algorithm
Reference(s)
Energy supply side
Single microgrid
Fuzzy Q-learning (multi-agent)
Koﬁnas et al. (2018)
Cooperative RL (multi-agent)
Weirong Liu, et al. (2018)
DQN
Ji et al. (2019)
Combination of ADP and RL
Venayagamoorthy et al. (2016)
Multi-microgrid
Combination of DNN and MC
Du & Li (2020)
EI
A3C
Hua et al. (2019)
IES
Q-learning
Y. Li et al. (2018) , H. Liu et al. (2019) , Rayati et al. (2015)
Single ESS
DDQN
Bui et al. (2020)
Hybrid ESSs
Q-learning
X. Qiu et al. (2016)
DDQN
Z. Zhang et al. (2019)
User side
Electric water heater
Q-learning
Al-Jabery et al. (2014) , Al-Jabery et al. (2017)
Fitted Q-iteration
Ruelens et al. (2018)
HVAC
Q-learning
Sun et al. (2015) , Yujiao Chen et al. (2018)
Combination of RNN and Actor-Critic
Y. Wang et al. (2017)
Battery
Dual iterative Q-learning
Wei et al. (2015)
Residential customers in IES
Q-learning
Sheikhi et al. (2016)
Thermostatically controlled loads
Batch RL (multi-agent)
Claessens et al. (2018)
Smart building(s)
DQN/ Deep Policy Gradient
Mocanu et al. (2019)
Different home appliances
Q-learning (multi-agent)
Lu et al. (2019)
Whole system
Wind resources, PV, diesel generators,
battery, and customers
Q-learning (multi-agent)
Foruzan et al. (2018)
multi-constraints, which can be solved by RL. The goal of RL is to
maximize the long-term average reward of a generic system. This
coincides with the design objective of the operation optimization
which is established to improve the operation performance of sustainable energy and electric systems at a setting stage. This section divides the operation optimization of the energy systems into
three parts according to the research object: operation optimization of energy supply side, operation optimization of the user side
and operation optimization of the whole system. Table 1 summarizes these applications.
5.1.1. Operation optimization of the energy supply side
Under uncertainties introduced by intermittent renewable energy and stochastic demand from the consumers, RL can help sustainable energy and electric systems cope with the challenges of
guaranteeing energy supply and increasing the reliability of the
system. For instance, in order to solve the complex operation optimization problem on the energy supply side of a stand-alone microgrid, each component of the microgrid was deployed as an independent agent to reduce the state space in ( Koﬁnas, Dounis, &
Vouros, 2018 ). The multi-agent system adopts a distributed and
collaborative RL method to learn the optimal strategy. Furthermore,
in order to control the microgrid components which operate in a
continuous states and action space, fuzzy Q-learning is introduced
for individual agents to learn to manage system components. In
( Venayagamoorthy, Sharma, Gautam, & Ahmadi, 2016 ), an optimal
or near-optimal intelligent dynamic energy management system (IDEMS) which could perform grid-connected and islanded microgrid operations was developed by using an evolutionary adaptive
DP (ADP) and RL framework. The framework includes two neural
networks, among which the action network uses the microgrid’s
states to generate energy dispatch control signals, while the critical
network evaluates the dispatch signals over time, realizing fast online dynamic optimization of the I-DEMS performance. In addition,

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 5. Structure of EI operation optimization based on A3C in ( Hua, Qin, Hao, & Cao, 2019 ).
Weirong Liu, Zhuang, Liang, Peng, and Huang (2018) and Ji, Wang,
Xu, Fang, and Zhang (2019) also conducted in-depth research on
operation optimization of the energy supply side of a microgrid
based on cooperative RL and DQN respectively.
The above research aims at the operation optimization of single microgrid, for the operation optimization of multi-microgrid
(MMG), Du and Li ( 2019 ) considered customer privacy and proposed an intelligent MMG energy management method by implementing deep neural network (DNN) and model-free RL techniques
without direct access to user’s information, which could solve the
problem of power system operation optimization with hidden information or large search space. With respect to EI operation optimization, considering multi-objectives and multi-constraints, the
EI operation optimization problem can be formulated as a constrained optimal control problem. Since it is diﬃcult to establish
accurate mathematical models for the power of renewable power
resources and load, A3C algorithm is used to solve the optimal
control problem of EI ( Hua, Qin, Hao, & Cao, 2019 ). By applying
the A3C algorithm designed in Fig. 5 , the intelligent controller for
the EI can be reached. Given an observation of the EI system, the
network will generate corresponding control signals to achieve an
intelligent operation. The states of the environments include load,
photovoltaic power generation (PV), wind turbine power generation (WTG), distributed generation (DG) and state of charge (SOC)
of the battery energy storage (BES); the actions include control
signals of micro-turbine generator (MTG), diesel engine generator
(DEG), fuel cell (FC), and BES, and the optimization goal is to ﬁnd
the optimal control scheme such that the sum of total operation
cost and penalty cost is minimized, for more detailed information,
please see ( Hua, et al., 2019 ).
In addition, for the operation optimization of the energy supply side of IESs, ( Rayati, Sheikhi, & Ranjbar, 2015 ) adopted RL to
solve the operation optimization problem of a smart energy hub. Y.
Li, Tang, Lv, Guo, and Xu (2018) focused on the dynamic dispatch
optimization of the combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) energy system with uncertain renewable energy and demands. The
optimization problem was described as a MDP, and Q-learning was
adopted to obtain the optimal or suboptimal policy. H. Liu, Li, Ge,
Zhang, and Chen (2019) proposed an optimal scheduling method
based on multi-agent game and RL for different investors and operation subjects in the IES.
The energy storage systems (ESSs) in sustainable energy and
electric systems have ﬂexibility, which helps to achieve a balance
between energy production and energy demand in sustainable energy and electric systems. Speciﬁcally, when the energy production of the system exceeds the energy demand or the energy price
is low, the ESS can store the surplus energy for subsequent use;
when the energy production cannot meet the energy demand or
the energy price is high, the ESS can release energy, so as to
improve the economy and reliability of the system operation. RL
based operation strategies have recently been applied for optimal
operation of ESSs in sustainable energy and electric systems. In
(Bui, Hussain, & Kim, 2019), DDQN was used to optimize the operation of a community battery ESS in a microgrid. The proposed
operation strategy can deal with uncertainties in the system in
both grid-connected and islanded modes and maximize the proﬁt
in normal mode and minimize load shedding in islanded mode.
For integrating multiple types of storage, there are challenges in
managing each storage due to its different characteristics. In ( Z.
Zhang, Qiu, Zhang, Xu, & He, 2019 ), a hybrid energy system consisting of hydrogen (long-term ESS) and battery (short-term ESS)
was constructed. Coordinated control of the hybrid ESSs can be formulated as a sequential decision-making problem and solved effectively with DDQN. Besides, a microgrid energy storage system
including lead-acid battery and vanadium redox battery (VRB) was
constructed in ( X. Qiu, Nguyen, & Crow, 2016 ), and RL was used to
optimize the coordination of different ESSs.
5.1.2. Operation optimization of the user side
Demand side management (DSM) can make users actively participate in the optimal operation of sustainable energy and electric
systems, and is able to reduce energy consumption/cost while ensuring energy quality, which is an important means to realize the
optimization of user side operation. The implementation of DSM

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
greatly depends on incorporating user feedback and energy consumption patterns in its control loop. One of the important characteristics of RL is that it is easy to acquire the feedback information of users and learn self-improvement from it. It is a learning
method with potential to achieve the goal of user side operation
optimization of sustainable energy and electric systems. At present,
energy equipment/systems with great potential for DSM applications mainly include domestic hot water (DHW), heating ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), smart home appliances and electric vehicles (EVs). These energy equipment/systems will not only
impact the sustainable energy and electric systems, but also are
closely related to human comfort and economic cost. Therefore, it
is of great signiﬁcance to manage them so as to achieve the operation optimization of the user side.
Electric water heaters can store energy in their water buffer
without impacting the comfort of the user. This feature makes
them a prime candidate for residential demand side management.
However, the stochastic and non-linear dynamics of electric water
heaters makes it challenging to harness their ﬂexibility. Driven by
this challenge, the sequential decision-making problem of electric
water heaters can be formulated as a MDP and RL can be used to
solve the optimal control strategy ( Al-Jabery, Wunsch, Xiong, & Shi,
2014 ; Al-Jabery, et al., 2017 ; Ruelens, et al., 2018 ). In order to mitigate the curse of dimensionality, Ruelens, et al. (2018) applied an
automatic encoder network to ﬁnd a compact feature representation of the sensor measurements, and realized the optimal management of the electric water heater.
HVAC systems can promote the economic operation of sustainable energy and electric systems by pre-heating or pre-cooling
the indoor spaces to achieve some degree of load shifting. A lot
of research has been carried out on optimizing HVAC operation
based on RL (Yujiao Chen, Norford, Samuelson, & Malkawi, 2018 ;
Sun, Luh, Jia, & Yan, 2015 ; Y. Wang, Velswamy, & Huang, 2017 ). Y.
Wang, et al. (2017) used model-free actor-critic RL to optimize the
operation of HVAC in the oﬃce space. In order to learn the temporal correlations in temperature state observations, long shortterm memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were introduced to represent policy and value, which improved energy
eﬃciency without sacriﬁcing the thermal comfort. In addition,
Wei, Zhang, Qiao, and Qu (2015) proposed a novel dual iterative
Q-learning algorithm to optimize the energy management of the
battery installed in the residential user side of residential energy
systems, so as to minimize the total expense of the power from
the grid and extend the life of the battery.
RL was suggested for demand side management for residential customers in IESs in ( Sheikhi, Rayati, & Ranjbar, 2016 ). The
proposed fully automated energy management system (EMS) estimates the residential customers’ satisfaction function, energy
prices, and eﬃciencies of appliances based on customers’ historical
actions, so as to motivate customers for participating in DSM programs and reducing the peak load in both electricity and natural
gas networks. Additionally, an optimal operation problem of thermostatically controlled loads (e.g. hot water storage tanks) connected to a district heating network was considered as a sequential decision-making problem under uncertainty in ( Claessens, Vanhoudt, Desmedt, & Ruelens, 2018 ). The decision-making problem
was formalized as a MDP and a combination of batch RL (BRL) and
multi-agent system was used to minimize the peak demand and
reduce the energy cost.
In terms of user side operation optimization of smart buildings,
Mocanu, et al. (2019) considerd three types of electrical devices
in residential buildings, including time-scaling load (air conditioning), time-shifting load (dishwasher) and time scaling and shifting
load (EV). The building environment was modeled as a MDP, and
value-based method DQN and policy-based method DPG were respectively used to learn the optimization strategy of demand side
operation, so as to optimize building energy consumption or energy cost in an on-line manner. The proposed online operation
optimization strategy can cope with the high uncertainty of the
energy consumption patterns of users and provide real-time feedback to users to encourage more eﬃcient use of energy. Considering the uncertainty of future electricity price, an ANN can be used
to forecast the future electricity price. On this basis, considering
the characteristics and priorities of different home appliances, the
appliances can be separated into three main types: non-shiftable,
shiftable and controllable loads, and multi-agent RL can be adopted
to make optimal decisions for multiple home appliances in a decentralized manner, so as to minimize user energy bills and dissatisfaction costs ( Lu, Hong, & Yu, 2019 ).
5.1.3. Operation optimization of the whole system
In order to realize the cooperative operation optimization of the
energy supply side and the user side in sustainable energy and
electric systems, collaborative management of resources in the energy supply side and responsive resources in the user side can be
carried out so as to realize the optimization of their own proﬁt.
However, for every supplier, a lack of information about users
and other suppliers creates challenges to optimal decision making in order to maximize its return. Similarly, users face diﬃculty
in scheduling their energy consumption without any information
about suppliers and energy prices. Additionally, there are several
uncertainties involved in energy systems due to ﬂuctuation of renewable energy generation and variability of users’ consumption.
In order to cope with these challenges, the energy suppliers and
users can be modeled as autonomous agents, and RL can be used
to realize the overall cooperative operation optimization of the system. When the agent changes its behavior, it can update the model
locally based on the new information and learn its new best response without the need for excessive communication to a central
controller or other agents, so that the energy suppliers, distributed
storage, and users can develop optimal strategies for energy management and load scheduling without prior information about each
other and the energy system ( Foruzan, Soh, & Asgarpoor, 2018 ).
The energy and load management method consists of ﬁve types
of agents: wind resources, PV, diesel generators, battery storages,
and customers. Interactions of agents and the environment during
the learning process lead the system to asymptotically converge to
the Nash equilibrium.
5.2. Applications of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems
control
With the development and evolution of sustainable energy and
electric systems, the system structures and components are changing constantly. There are many unstable factors in the system, and
the actual operating conditions are changing all the time. The uncertainty and complexity of system operation are gradually increasing, which requires more robust and adaptive control technologies. Traditional control methods are mostly based on physical characteristics of the system. However, physical modeling is
conducted according to different topological structures, operation
modes and fault types. Therefore, it is not adaptable to changes
of sustainable energy and electric systems structures and new
power electronic devices, and it is diﬃcult to meet the development needs of the system. Therefore, researchers try to replace
process simulation with data-driven methods, and directly formulate strategies to control the system with the help of autonomous
decision-making ability of RL. Power system control is the top priority of sustainable energy and electric systems control, so we
mainly focus on the applications of RL in power system control.
The power system faces different control problems in different operation states. According to the operation states of the system, the

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Table 2
Summary of the applications of RL in power system control.
Classiﬁcation
Learning algorithm
Reference(s)
Emergency control
RL
Ernst et al. (2004) , Glavic (2005) , Yu and Zhen (2009) , Guo et al. (2006) , Rashidi and
Rashidi (2003) , Mohagheghi et al. (2006) , Hadidi and Jeyasurya (2013) , Youseﬁan and
Kamalasadan (2015) , Zarrabian et al. (2016)
Combination of RL and classical
control method
Glavic et al. (2005) , Ernst et al. (2009) , D. Wang et al. (2014) , B. Li et al. (1999)
DRL
Wei Liu et al. (2018) , Cao et al. (2019)
Normal control
RL
Yu et al. (2009) , Yu et al. (2012) , Saikia et al. (2011) , Xi et al. (2018) , Tang et al. (2015) , V. P.
Singh et al. (2017) , Diao et al. (2015) , Tousi et al. (2011) , Tan et al. (2016)
DRL
Yin and Yu (2018) , Yin et al. (2018)
Transfer RL
X. Zhang et al. (2017)
MPPT control
RL
C. Wei et al. (2015) , Hsu et al. (2015) , Koﬁnas et al. (2017)
Combination of ANN and RL
C. Wei et al. (2016)
control problems of the power system are divided into security and
stability control under emergency state and frequency/voltage control under normal state. Table 2 summarizes the applications of RL
in power system control.
5.2.1. Security and stability control of the system under emergency
state
The security and stability control of power systems mainly considers that the normal operation of the system can be guaranteed
by taking control measures after disturbance. In the case of transient angle instability or oscillatory angle instability, Ernst, Glavic,
and Wehenkel (2004) designed a power system stability control
framework based on RL which included two modes. The online
mode interacted with the real power system and the oﬄine mode
interacted with a simulation model of the real power system.
The online mode can cope with the diﬃculty of system modeling or some phenomena cannot be reproduced in a simulation environment. Based on the oﬄine control mode, Glavic (2005) designed a thyristor-switched resistive brake controller with multiple
switches. In addition, based on RL algorithms, scholars have designed power system security and stability devices such as power
system stabilizer (PSS) ( Yu & Zhen, 2009 ), direct current supplementary damping controller ( Guo, Zhang, & Hu, 2006 ), dynamic
quadrature booster ( B. Li, Wu, Wang, & Zhou, 1999 ), static var compensator (SVC) ( Rashidi & Rashidi, 2003 ) and static compensator
( Mohagheghi, Venayagamoorthy, & Harley, 2006 ), which have good
adaptability to the stability and dynamics of the system and are
suitable for power systems with many uncertainties and severe
disturbances.
A more in depth consideration of ways to combine RL with
classical control theory methods would be especially valuable in
cases of power systems stability control applications. Glavic, Ernst,
and Wehenkel (2005) combined control Lyapunov functions (CLF)
and online RL control mode built and realized RL optimal control in stable regions. The combination of a stability-oriented and
a performance-oriented control technique provides a promising
way to implement advanced control schemes in power systems.
Moreover, some scholars have proposed to integrate RL methods
with existing control technologies such as model predictive control
( Ernst, Glavic, Capitanescu, & Wehenkel, 2009 ; D. Wang, Glavic, &
Wehenkel, 2014 ), fuzzy logic control ( B. Li, et al., 1999 ), so as to
achieve a better control effect.
RL has also been involved in wide-area stabilizing control of
power systems. In order to stabilize the system after severe disturbances and mitigate the oscillations afterward, a real-time closeloop wide-area decentralized control structure was designed based
on a RL method called Least Worst Action Q-learning ( Hadidi &
Jeyasurya, 2013 ). In this method, instead of relying on a mathematical model of the system, data from real-time measurements were
used. It enlarged the stability domain of the power system and also
enhanced the damping of the system oscillations. Youseﬁan and
Kamalasadan (2015) presentd a new method for designing and implementing coordinated wide area controller architecture based on
reinforcement and TD learning which allowed the system to learn
from interaction and predict future states. The main advantage of
this design is its ability to learn from the past using eligibility
traces and predict the optimal trajectory through TD learning in
the format of receding horizon control.
In terms of congestion control, Zarrabian, Belkacemi, and Babalola (2016) proposed a method based on the RL for preventing cascading failure and blackout in smart grids by acting on the
output power of the generators in real-time. It utilizes Q-learning
to train the system for the optimal action selection strategy during the state-action learning process by updating the action values based on the obtained rewards. The trained system can relieve
congestion of transmission lines in real-time by adjusting the output power of the generators (actions) to prevent consecutive line
outages and blackout after N-1 and N-1-1 contingency conditions.
Note that the ability of RL in information perception is weak. In
order to improve the correctness of decision-making and control
eﬃciency, the advantages of DL in feature extraction can be taken
to extract the operation characteristics in the early stage of analyzing the power grid environmental information and then highvalue density information can be provided as input data for RL.
Deep CNN and Q-learning were used for power system generating unit tripping strategy in (Wei Liu, Zhang, Wang, Hou, & Liu,
2018 ), which realized the direct mapping from power system operation information to generating unit tripping control strategy. Aiming at the decision-making optimization problem of transient voltage stability in EI scenario, a DRL algorithm was applied to optimize the reactive power compensation decision of EI ( Cao, Zhang,
Xiao, & Hua, 2019 ). The proposed method makes full use of realtime state information and network topology information obtained
by massive data acquisition devices and fulﬁls the expectation of
distributed reactive compensation and minimization of total reactive compensation.
5.2.2. Frequency/voltage control of the system under normal state
RL, as a type of self-learning intelligent control algorithm,
can be used to solve complex nonlinear frequency/voltage control problems in power systems. The power system frequency is
maintained to its nominal value by nullifying the power mismatch
between active power generation and load demand using automatic generation control (AGC) ( Pathak, Verma, Bhatti, & Nasiruddin, 2019 ). The AGC is a dynamic multistage decision-making problem and its control process can be formulated as a MDP. Q-learning
method based on MDP can be applied to AGC, which regards the
control performance standard (CPS) values as the reward from the
interconnected power grids. By regulating a closed-loop CPS control rule to maximize the total reward in the procedure of interac-

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 6. The imitation pre-learning process of RL controller (adopted and modiﬁed from Yu et al., 2019).
tive learning, the robustness and adaptability of the system can be
obviously enhanced ( Yu, Zhou, & Chan, 2009 ).
In Yu, et al. (2012) , a R( λ) imitation learning (R( λ)IL) method
was used to develop an optimal automatic generation controller
under CPS. It can learn the control behaviors of the existing automatic generation controller by observing the system changes during the run time. This addresses the defect in the applicability
of conventional RL controllers, which an accurate power system
model is required for going throught the oﬄine pre-learning process. As shown in Fig. 6 , the RL controller observes AGC regulating
commands from the existing PI controller to learn and imitate its
control behaviors. The system state constists of 1 min moving averages of CPS1 and area control error (ACE), the agent action is the
AGC regulating command and the reward function considers both
the CPS performance and the relaxed control objective. The prelearning process will complete once the set termination criterion
is satisﬁed and the toggle switch can be actuated to contactor 2
to deactivate the PI controller and put the RL controller online for
live operation.
Furthermore, RL is applied to the automatic generation control of a multi-area hydrothermal hybrid system considering reheat
steam turbines in thermal areas and electric governor in hydro areas. The designed controllers are quite robust to wide changes in
system loading, inertia constant and size and location of step load
perturbation ( Saikia, Mishra, Sinha, & Nanda, 2011 ). Meanwhile,
it is noticed that RL is weak in information perception. The prediction mechanism of a DNN can be used as the action selection
mechanism of RL to enhance the cognitive ability of the algorithm
to the system, so that it can be applied to the robust intelligent
power generation control ( Yin & Yu, 2018 ; Yin, Yu, & Zhou, 2018 ).
Recently, the diversiﬁcation of distributed generation access to
the power grid and increasing randomness of intermittent new
energy power generation have made system control more diﬃ-
cult. In order to solve the stochastic disturbance to the power grid
caused by the large-scale integration of distributed energy sources,
Xi, et al. (2018) proposed a multi-agent RL algorithm named Policy
Dynamics based Win or Learn Fast Policy Hill-Climbing ( λ) based
on the idea of a time tunnel. The optimal strategy can be obtained
by adopting the variable learning rate in a variety of complex operating environments, which is diﬃcult for traditional centralized
AGC.
Increasing deployment of intermittent power generation in the
smart grid will cause large system frequency ﬂuctuation when the
load frequency control (LFC) capacity is insuﬃcient to compensate
the unbalance of generation and load demand. What is worse, the
system inertia will decrease when the smart grid is in islanded
mode, which would degrade system damping and cause system instability. At the same time, EVs will be widely used in the near future, and an EV station could be treated as a dispersed battery energy storage station. Therefore, Tang, Yang, Yan, and He (2015) employed the vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology to compensate for inadequate LFC capacity, thus improving the island grid frequency
stability. An on-line RL based method, named goal representation
ADP (GrADP), was employed to adaptively control units in an island grid, which held superior instant learning ability and robust
control effect. LFC differs from AGC in that AGC includes LFC together with generation dispatch function for control of so called
area control error that is a parameterized sum of frequency deviation and active power ﬂows over so-called tie-lines ( Glavic, 2019 ).
Besides, multi-area power systems are impacted by changes in
communication topologies (CTs). Their operating mode and power
output are often uncontrollable because they are subjected to
changes of CTs. As a result, some areas may connect into networks
or disconnect from networks at any time. Therefore, the controller
design in smart grid environment must have a large degree of
intelligence and ﬂexibility to face CT and uncertain environment.
Based on RL, V. P. Singh, Kishor, and Samuel (2017) presented an
intelligent controller for LFC in smart grid with CT changes using an MAS technique. The controller is composed of an estimator
agent and a controller agent. The estimator agent is responsible for
estimating the frequency-bias coeﬃcients and the controller agent
is used to compensate for the power imbalance between generations against the load demand, which improves the dynamic performance of the system under the LFC scheme.
In power system voltage control, voltage and reactive power
control has the inherent characteristics of non-linearity, strong
coupling and real-time needs. Its control laws are affected by numerous factors, such as system time variation, changing operating conditions and network parameters. RL methods have strong
learning ability and high adaptability, making them very suitable for voltage and reactive power control. Diao, Yang, Chen, and
Sun (2015) used Q-learning algorithm to learn continuously under interaction between the action policies and grid states, then
got the Q-value function corresponding to each state-action, and
ﬁnally formed the optimal regional grid reactive power and voltage control strategies. Tousi, Hosseinian, and Menhaj (2011) used
a combination of multi-agent system (MAS) technology and RL to
provide a desirable voltage proﬁle for the power system. In the
proposed schema, individual agents who are assigned to voltage
controller devices learn from their experiences to control the system voltage, and also cooperate and communicate with each other
to satisfy the whole team goals. Moreover, in order to solve multiarea decentralized collaborative reactive power optimization problem, a hierarchically correlated equilibrium Q-learning (HCEQ) al-

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Table 3
The environment state, agent action and reward deﬁnition for MPPT control of the WECS.
Deﬁnition
State
(The generator rotor speed, the electrical output power of the wind turbine)
Action
The speed control command: {increment, stay, decrement}
Reward
If the selected action leads to an increment of electrical output power: + 1 If the selected action leads to an decrement of electrical output power: −1
If the selected action only leads to a small difference of output power: 0
gorithm for reactive power optimization that considered carbon
emission on the grid-side as an optimization objective was proposed by Tan, Han, Zhang, Guo, and Yu (2016) . For the reactive
power optimization in large-scale power systems, X. Zhang, Yu,
Yang, and Cheng (2017) proposed a novel accelerating bio-inspired
optimizer (ABO) associated with transfer RL (TRL). A memory matrix was employed to represent the memory of different stateaction pairs, which was used for knowledge learning, storage, and
transfer among different optimization tasks. The proposed method
can rapidly seek the closest solution to the exact global optimum
by exploiting the prior knowledge of the source tasks according to
their similarities. With the combination of multi-agent system, DL
and transfer learning, RL will play an increasingly important role
in voltage optimization control.
5.2.3. Clean energy (wind power/PV) maximum power point tracking
control
In recent years, wind power has been extensively developed
and is expected to be a major alternative source for clean and
renewable electricity supply in the future. Currently, the majority
of wind power is generated by variable-speed wind energy conversion systems (WECSs). In a variable-speed WECS, the shaft rotating speed can be controlled such that the WECS can track the
maximum power points (MPPs) to generate the maximum power
for all wind speed conditions. Therefore, an effective MPP tracking (MPPT) control algorithm forms an essential part of the control
system of a modern variable-speed WECS. MPPT control methods
mainly include tip speed ratio (TSR) control, optimal relationshipbased (ORB) control and perturbation and observation (P&O) control. TSR and ORB methods require prior knowledge of wind speed
sensors, WECS or cumbersome off-line design process; while in
P&O control, WECS will not learn lessons, that is, it has been
searching for MPP, or even experienced MPP before, so it responds
slowly to changes in wind speed.
In order to overcome the shortcomings of traditional MPPT control methods, which need prior knowledge or cannot be learned
from experience, model-free RL is introduced into MPPT control.
Generator rotor speed and electrical output power are used as
state space and the change of speed control command is used as
action space for the controller. A positive reward will be given to
the agent if the selected action leads to an increment of the output power, whereas a negative reward will be given if the output power decreases. The controller updates the value of the action according to the received reward and learns the mapping
from the state to optimal action online, so as to obtain a general MPPT control method independent of photovoltaic characteristics. Wei, et al. (2015) proposed an intelligent MPPT algorithm
for variable-speed WECSs based on the RL method. The deﬁnitions
of the environmental state, agent action and reward for MPPT control of the WECS are shown in Table 3 . The proposed MPPT algorithm consists of two processes: an online learning process and an
online application process. In the online learning process, the controller of the WECS behaves similarly to an agent to interact with
the environment to learn the MPPs from its own experience using Q-learning. The optimum rotor speed-electrical output power
curve is then obtained from these MPPs and used for fast MPPT
control of the WECS in the application process. The proposed MPPT
method does not require prior knowledge of the WECS and enables
the agent to reach the MPP faster at a wind speed that has been
experienced before and respond quickly to wind speed variations
after learning.
Furthermore, in order to eliminate the need for a large
lookup table in the traditional RL whose size is usually selected through oﬄine simulation studies, Wei, Zhang, Qiao, and
Qu (2016) combined ANN and Q-learning method for MPPT control
of variable-speed WECSs of permanent magnet synchronous generator (PMSG). It not only provides predictions for the knowledge
never previously experienced, which shortens the online learning
time and improves the learning eﬃciency, but also saves the computational cost.
As one of the potential new energy sources, solar energy is
mainly used for photovoltaic power generation. In order to improve eﬃciency, a photovoltaic must continuously generate the
maximum possible power under different environmental conditions. The MPPT photovoltaic process was deﬁned as a MDP model
and an RL algorithm was used to solve the MPPT control problem in ( Hsu, Liu, Chen, Hsieh, & Wang, 2015 ). On this basis, the
application scenario of MPPT controller was extended from varying irradiance and stationary temperature to different operating
conditions, varying temperature, irradiance and electrical load in
( Koﬁnas, Doltsinis, Dounis, & Vouros, 2017 ).
5.3. Applications of RL in energy markets
With the increasing social demand for energy, the demand for
energy (electricity) as a commodity for free trade is increasing. The
research on the energy market of electricity, gas and heat, as well
as the impact of energy prices on system operation, has attracted
wide attention. Since RL is essentially the pursuit of the maximum
cumulative value of long-term reward for an agent, it is very suitable for the decision-making needs of trading individuals in energy
markets.
5.3.1. Bidding strategy formulation
In terms of market transactions and bidding strategies, due to
the inﬂuence of the market operation mode, energy supply and
demand and many other factors, the game between the operation of production, transmission, transfer, utilization and storage
and the user’s energy consumption should be considered, that is,
energy transaction equilibrium and bidding strategy in terms of
electricity, gas, heat, oil and other energies in a fully competitive market environment. For example, in the bidding process of
power suppliers, due to the incomplete information between competitors and the complexity of the trading market, the bidding
decision-making process of power suppliers (generators) and their
interactions in the market are complex and dynamic problems
that are diﬃcult to model explicitly through traditional analytical methods, especially when considering medium and long-term
transactions. The RL method is very suitable for analyzing the dynamic behavior of complex systems with uncertainties. It can be
used to identify the optimal bidding strategy in the energy market ( Kozan, Zlatar, Paravan, & Gubina, 2014 ). Ma, Jiang, Hou, Bompard, and Wang (2006) proposed a decision-making process model
for medium and long-term transactions which could simulate the

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
strategic bidding of power suppliers based on the Watkins’s Q( λ).
It does not need an explicit mathematical expression model in the
actual optimization process, and can be used to deﬁne the optimal bidding strategy for each supplier as well as ﬁnding the market equilibrium. Aliabadi, Kaya, and Sahin (2017) studied bidding
strategies that consider generation companies’ rivals’ as well as
their own learning behavior and risk aversion levels. To model the
learning behavior of generation companies, the researchers used a
modiﬁed Q-learning algorithm in which each company (agent) experimented with bid price alternatives and learned through experience. Considering the fuzzy nature of human’s decision-making
processes, a fuzzy system was designed to map each agent’s market power into the Q-learning parameters ( Rahimiyan & Mashhadi, 2010 ). The fuzzy Q-learning selects the power supplier’s bidding strategy according to the past experiences and the values
of the parameters, which show the human risk characteristics,
making each agent adapt its response to market changes such as
changes in the network topology, generation conﬁguration and rivals’ behavior rapidly and proﬁtably.
Methods mentioned above need to discrete the action space,
which lead to the information loss since the bidding volume is
continuous. Zhao, Wang, Guo, Zhao and Zhang (2016) applied a
gradient descent continuous Actor-Critic algorithm in the doubleside day-ahead electricity market modeling and simulation. The
proposed approach can cope with the issues with continuous state
and action sets without causing trouble of curse of dimensionality.
Ye, Qiu, Li, and Strbac (2019) proposed a multi-agent DRL based
methodology, combining multi-agent intelligence and a DPG-LSTM
method, to expedite practical multi-period and multi-spatial equilibrium analysis. In the proposed approach, strategic generation
companies (agents) do not rely on any knowledge of the computational algorithm of the market clearing process (environment)
and the operating parameters and offering strategies of their competitors, but only on their own operating parameters, the observed
market clearing outcomes and the publicly available information
on the market condition. The agents are capable of learning their
optimal strategies by utilizing experiences acquired from daily repeated interactions with the market clearing process and devising
more proﬁtable bidding decisions by exploiting the entire action
domain. Considering the physical nonconvex operating characteristics of the electricity producers in the complex bidding markets, an
improved DDPG-based methodology was developed to optimizing
the strategic bidding decisions in Ye, Qiu, Sun, Papadaskalopoulos,
& Strbac (2020) .
In terms of renewable energy bidding problem, Li and
Shi (2012) proposed to use RL algorithm for the wind generation
company bidding optimization so as to maximize its net earnings
in the day-ahead electricity markets. Cao, et al. (2020) investigated
the possible opportunities for wind power producers if they can
take part in the reserve market to schedule some reserve to reduce
the risk of being punished due to the inaccuracy of wind power
prediction and the uncertainty of electricity price. This problem
was formulated as a MDP and A3C was used for the bidding strategy formulation.
5.3.2. Dynamic pricing
In regional energy systems, the service provider (SP) acts as a
broker between the utility company and customers by purchasing
energy from the utility company and selling it to the customers
(CUs). For the SP, although dynamic pricing is an effective tool for
managing energy systems, the implementation of dynamic pricing
is highly challenging due to the lack of CU-side information and
various types of uncertainties in the system. Similarly, the CUs also
face challenges in scheduling their energy consumption due to the
uncertainty of the retail energy price.
In order to overcome the challenges of implementing dynamic
pricing and energy consumption scheduling, Kim, Zhang, Van Der
Schaar, and Lee (2016) developed RL algorithms that allow each of
the SPs and the CUs to learn its strategy without a priori information about the energy system, which signiﬁcantly reduced the
CUs’ cost as well as the system cost. In addition, Lu, Hong, and
Zhang (2018) comprehensively considered SP proﬁt and CU costs
and formulated the dynamic pricing problem as a discrete ﬁnite
MDP, and then adopted Q-learning to solve the decision-making
problem. The proposed algorithm can promote SP proﬁtability, reduce energy costs for CUs, and balance energy supply and demand
in the electricity market, which can be regarded as a win-win
strategy for both SP and CUs.
Existing works are mostly concerned with either the bidding
problem or the pricing problem. The bidding problem and the pricing problem are inherently coupled, since the energy purchased
in the wholesale electricity market and that sold in the retailed
electricity market must balance, and the proﬁt earned by the LSE
is dependent on the results in both markets. Therefore, it is indeed more desirable to solve the bidding problem and the pricing
problem jointly. Xu, Sun, Nikovski, Kitamura, Mori, and Hashimoto
(2019) studied the problem of jointly determining the energy bid
submitted to the wholesale electricity market and the energy price
charged in the retailed electricity market for a load serving entity.
The joint bidding and pricing problem is formulated as a MDP formulation with continuous state and action spaces, in which the energy bid and the energy price are two actions that share a common
objective. DDPG was applied to solve this MDP for the optimal bidding and pricing policies.
In addiation, Chen and Su (2019) explored the role of emerging
energy brokers (middlemen) in a localized event-driven market at
the distribution level for facilitating indirect customer-to- customer
energy trading. The energy trading process was built as a MDP and
a modiﬁed Q-Learning algorithm was used to solve this problem. In
Lincoln, Galloway, Stephen and Burt (2012) , RL algorithms were applied in simulations of competitive electricity trade. In this paper,
two policy gradient algorithms using ANN for policy function approximation were compared with a value-function based method
in simulations of electricity trade.
5.4. Applications of RL in cyber security and defense
Modern sustainable energy and electric systems are no
longer traditional physical systems, but have envolved into cyber and physical deep coupling energy cyber physical systems (D.
Liu, Sheng, Wang, Lu, & Sun, 2015 ; Yang, Huang, Pen, & Zhang,
2017 ; Yang, Zhang, Li, & Zomaya, 2020 ). The weak link of the system is no longer conﬁned to the physical subsystem, but the cyber link may become a new weak spot. Therefore, the cyber security and defense of energy cyber physical systems becomes more
and more important. The 2010 Iranian nuclear power earthquake
network attack and the 2013 Ukrainian blackout are more factual
reminders of the importance of network security in the national
energy system.
Intrusion detection is the primary defense technology in cyber
security. At present, the known intrusion attack methods for energy cyber physical systems mainly include false data injection,
virus attack, black hole attack, eavesdropping attack, denial of service (DoS) attack and so on ( Mo, et al., 2011 ). Moreover, they are
moving towards the trend of teamwork combined attack.
5.4.1. From the perspective of the defender
Recently, researchers have introduced RL into the process of
power intrusion detection. Some established intrusion detection
system models based on semi-MDP (SMDP) RL that can detect not only known intrusions, but also unknown intrusions

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
( S. Li, Wang, Wang, & Niu, 2006 ), or formulated the online
cyberattack/anomaly detection problem as a partial observable
MDP (POMDP) problem that can be solved by model-free RL
( Kurt, Ogundijo, Li, & Wang, 2019 ). In order to minimize the cyberattack impacts on power infrastructures, a DRL based recovery
strategy was proposed to optimally reclose the transmission lines
lost in the cyberattack ( Wei, Wan, & He, 2019 ). The DRL framework endowed the recovery strategy with environmental adaptability and real-time decision-making ability.
5.4.2. From the perspective of the attacker
The above research considers the system security from the perspective of the defender. In addition, some scholars have studied it
from the perspective of the attacker, whose aim is to determine
the attack strategy that leads to maximized damage to the system, analyze the vulnerability of the system and take necessary
precautions accordingly. Yan, He, Zhong, and Tang (2016) used a
Q-learning based approach to adaptively identify the more vulnerable attack sequence that could cause critical system failure from
sequential topology attacks based on the self-learning ability of RL.
Ying Chen, Huang, Liu, Wang, and Sun (2019) modeled the optimal
attack strategy as a POMDP and adopted a Q-learning algorithm
with nearest sequence memory to enable on-line false data injection attacks on power systems. RL can also be adopted to study the
multistage dynamic game between the attacker and the defender.
Given a certain objective (e.g., transmission line outages or generation loss), the optimal attack sequences can be identiﬁed. Through
the learning of "simulated" attackers, defenders can eventually better prepare defense strategies ( Ni & Paul, 2019 ).
Moreover, by seamlessly combining RL with game theory and
fuzzy cluster based analytical methods, security situational awareness for the smart grid can be achieved (Jun Wu, Ota, Dong, Li, &
Wang, 2018 ). Based on the proposed mechanism, the extraction of
cyber security situation factors, cyber situational assessment and
security situational prediction can be realized for the smart grid.
5.5. Applications of RL in electric vehicle management
With the increasingly serious global energy shortage and deepening environmental problems, EVs are favored by countries all
over the world due to advantages of high eﬃciency, energy saving and economy, and have become a research hotspot. However,
the access of EVs to the power grid will not only affect the load
and power quality of distribution networks, but also affect the reliability and stable operation of the grid. Especially when the penetration of EVs is high, the threat will become more apparent if the
charging of EV is not guided. The charging strategy of EV is a dynamic decision-making problem, which can be modeled as a MDP
and then solved by RL.
Chi ¸s , Lundén, and Koivunen (2017) proposed a batch RL based
charging strategy that aimed at reducing the long-term cost of
charging the battery of an individual plug-in EV (PEV). The method
makes use of actual electricity prices for the current day and
predicted electricity prices for the following day which captures
the day-to-day differences of electricity charging costs and minimizes the charging cost of PEV. Arif, et al. (2016) studied different dispatching strategies of EVs under different price structures and formulated the scheduling problem of PEV charging
as a multistage decision making problem under uncertainty. Finally, Q-learning algorithm was used to ﬁnd the optimum schedule. Vandael, Claessens, Ernst, Holvoet, and Deconinck (2015) addressed the problem of deﬁning a day-ahead consumption plan for
charging a ﬂeet of EVs without an accurate mathematical model
of charging ﬂexibility. The charging behavior of the EV ﬂeet was
learned by using batch mode RL and a cost-effective day-ahead
plan could be deﬁned.
Considering the randomness of both the electricity price and
the commuting behavior, Wan, Li, He, and Prokhorov (2019) formulated the EV charging/discharging scheduling problem as a MDP
with unknown transition probability. A model-free approach based
on DRL was proposed to determine the optimal strategy for the
real-time scheduling problem. The architecture of the proposed approach contains a representation network and a Q network. The
representation network extracts discriminative features from the
electricity price. After concatenating these features with battery
SOC, the concatenated features are fed into a Q network to approximate the action-value of all feasible schedules under the given input state. The schedule with the largest action-value is selected as
the EV charging/discharging schedule. The overall diagram of the
approach is illustrated in Fig. 7 . The electricity price trends are captured by a LSTM network. Its input is the past 24-hour electricity
price and its output is the features containing information about
future price trends. The output of the LSTM network is concatenated with the battery SOC. Then, they are fed into the Q network
to approximate the optimal action-value function Q ( s, a ).
Electric taxis (ETs) are closely related to people’s lives, with
the characteristics of high driving density and uncertain driving
routes. In addition, the operation behavior of ETs involves passengers, transportation network, charging station and power grid, etc.,
and its decision-making is inﬂuenced by many factors, which has
strong randomness and dynamics. At the same time, the purpose
of ET is proﬁt-making and the ET is limited by the ﬁxed charging time and location. Its operation and load characteristics will be
more complex than private EVs and electric buses, and the resulting random load will have a greater impact on the uncertainty of
the power grid. Traditional charging load modeling of EVs mostly
adopts MC method or mathematical optimization method, which
needs to greatly simplify the relevant models and is diﬃcult to
consider the autonomy and self-adaptability of each agent. It is dif-
ﬁcult to accurately simulate the actual operation system in temporal and spatial scales, especially for plug-in ETs (PETs) with strong
randomness and complex operation behavior. In order to solve this
problem, Jiang, Jing, Cui, Ji, and Wu (2018) proposed a real-time
simulation system for PET operation based on multi-agent technology and RL. In this system, a variety of agent models have been
built, such as PET agent, map agent, charging station agent and
power grid agent. Multi-step Q( λ) is used to dynamically simulate
the decision-making process of PET. The system can ﬁnd the optimal strategy by adjusting its behavior through constantly interactive learning between agents and the environment.
In addition, in terms of the design of EMS of EV, with the help
of self-learning ability of RL, Qi, Wu, Boriboonsomsin, Barth, and
Gonder (2016) and Xiong, Cao, and Yu (2018) proposed real-time
RL-based EMSs for plug-in hybrid EV, which solved the contradiction between the real-time performance of EV and optimal energy
saving. In (T. Liu, Zou, Liu, & Sun, 2015 ) and ( Zou, Liu, Liu, & Sun,
2016 ), Q-learning was applied to the energy management for a hybrid tracked vehicle, which was more economical than stochastic
DP. Moreover, in order to solve the problem of curse of dimensionality resulted by too many discrete inputs of states in RL, DRL was
introduced in EV energy management in (Jingda Wu, He, Peng, Li,
& Li, 2018 ) and ( Qi, Luo, Wu, Boriboonsomsin, & Barth, 2019 ). Compared with traditional RL-based strategies, more state variables are
considered in DRL which means the agent can obtain and understand environmental information more accurately. The EV energy
management strategy obtained is also more accurate.
5.6. Other applications
In smart grid and EI, ﬂexible and eﬃcient communication
mechanisms are very important. Software-deﬁned networking
(SDN) has been used for real-time monitoring and communicat-

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
Fig. 7. The Overall diagram of the EV scheduling approach (adopted and modiﬁed from Wan, Li, He, & Prokhorov, 2019 ).
ing in EI. However, how to manage multiple controllers automatically and intelligently in software-deﬁned EI (SDEI) so as to keep
high accuracy in the real-time monitoring in complex EI environment is challenging. In distributed SDEI, RL has also been tentatively attempted. A controller mind framework to implement automatic management among multiple controllers based on RL in distributed SDEI was proposed in (C. Qiu, et al., 2019 ). The problem
was described as a MDP, and Q-learning was adopted to identify
the optimal scheme to allocate packet-in messages from the data
plane to the control plane with the minimum waiting time of QoS
ﬂows and the acceptable packet loss rate of best-effort ﬂows.
Based on the characteristics of interactive learning of RL, the
application of autonomous learning ability of RL is extended to
smart cities and Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystems. Providing
a large amount of training data is not always feasible in smart
city scenarios. Therefore, we need to consider alternative ways
that incorporate unlabeled data as well. Data can be partially labeled by users’ feedback for training purposes through RL, which
provides a feasible solution for supporting smart city services.
Mohammadi, Al-Fuqaha, Guizani, and Oh (2018) proposed a semisupervised DRL framework as a learning mechanism in support
of smart IoT services. The proposed model used labeled data
along with unlabeled data to improve the performance and accuracy of the learning agent. Besides, He, Yu, Zhao, Leung, and
Yin (2017) jointly considered networking, caching, and computing
to enhance the performance of applications for smart cities and
formulated the resource allocation strategy as a joint optimization problem. DQN was used to enable dynamic orchestration of
networking, caching, and computing resources in applications for
smart cities.
Furthermore, the integration of IoT and autonomous control
systems results in a new concept: autonomous IoT (AIoT). Lei, Tan,
Liu, and Zheng (2019) discussed the applications and challenges of
DRL in AIoT based on the structure of the IoT (including perception layer, network layer and application layer). Among them, the
applications of DRL in the perception layer include applications in
autonomous robots, smart vehicles and smart grid, the applications
in the network layer include applications in IoT communications
networks, and the applications in the application layer include applications in IoT edge/fog/cloud computing systems.
6. Challenges and prospects
With the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence to a strategic issue of
many countries around the world, the integration of new generation AI technologies and sustainable energy and electric systems
will become closer. However, the research works about applications of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems are largely
still in laboratory research stage, which have not been practically
implemented in sustainable energy and electric systems. There is
still a long way to go from the "usable" stage to the "well used"
stage. The following are some challenges and prospects:
1. A key point of using RL is to design an appropriate reward function ( Littman, 2015 ). At present, the reward functions are mainly deﬁned by researchers manually. An unreasonable reward will affect the ﬁnal optimal policy to a great
extent. A so-called inverse RL method addresses the challenge
of creating appropriate reward functions given the availability of behavioural traces from an expert executing the target
behaviour ( Littman, 2015 ). Foe example, some scholars have
tried to improve RL with the help of human teaching, so that
the agent can better learn the expected actions ( Thomaz &
Breazeal, 2008 ). Therefore, the research on reward functions
will be a hot spot in the future development of RL.
2. Systems integrating electric energy, thermal energy, gas and
other energy into sustainable energy and electric systems are
in the initial stage of development, and the complexity and uncertainty in the systems is more serious than conventional single energy systems, so there is a high demand for RL in this
ﬁeld. At present, research of RL in IESs is still rare, and it can
be predicted that the application of RL in IESs will be a fast
developing research direction in the future. Similarly, with the
increasingly coupling of cyber systems and physical systems in
energy systems, the application of RL in energy cyber physical
systems (including energy IoT) will also receive more and more
attention ( Glavic, 2019 ).
3. In terms of energy forecasting (including renewable energy
power forecasting and energy load forecasting), most of the
widely used machine learning models are trained by optimizing the global performance, without considering the local behavior. Feng, Sun, and Zhang (2020) introduced RL into power
load forecasting, and adopted RL to select the most appropriate
method from a number of available forecasting methods, which
provided a good idea for the application of RL in the ﬁeld of energy forecasting ( Glavic, 2019 ). In addition, the method can also
be extended to energy price forecasting in the energy market.
4. Transfer learning ( Pan & Yang, 2010 ) is a popular machine
learning technology recently. It can learn the general structure
of data in a data-driven way and is regared as an important research direction of AI in the future. However, its applications
in the energy ﬁeld are less reported at present. It is a new research topic worth exploring to introduce transfer learning into
RL, so as to leverage the advantages of transfer learning to better serve sustainable energy and electric systems.
5. The high-level application of RL in sustainable energy and electric systems is the deep integration of intelligent sensor, big
data analysis, machine learning, natural language processing
and other technologies, so as to evolve into intelligent machines. Although there are power robots for the application scenarios such as power inspection and equipment live mainte-

T. Yang, L. Zhao and W. Li et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 49 (2020) 145–163
nance at present, they do not have autonomous intelligent behavior and can only complete a single mode operation according to the set procedure. Therefore, breaking through the key
technologies such as autonomous learning and autonomous behavior, and developing intelligent power robots with humanoid
behavior ability will be a future development direction.
6. By embedding prior knowledge of speciﬁc ﬁelds into RL, human intelligence and artiﬁcial intelligence are fused to form a
higher and stronger level of intelligence than each of them individually, which will also has a broad application prospect in
the ﬁeld of sustainable energy and electric systems operation
and control.
Conﬂict of Interest
No potential conﬂict of interest exists for this article.
Acknowledgements
This effort was sponsored by National natural science foundation of China ( 61971305 , 61571324 ), National key research and development plan ( 2017YFE0132100 ), and Natural Science Foundation
of Tianjin, China ( 19JCQNJC060 0 0 ) .